Chapter I
The Bertolini


“The Signora had no business to do it,” said Miss Bartlett, “no
business at all. She promised us south rooms with a view close
together, instead of which here are north rooms, looking into a
courtyard, and a long way apart. Oh, Lucy!”

“And a Cockney, besides!” said Lucy, who had been further saddened by
the Signora’s unexpected accent. “It might be London.” She looked at
the two rows of English people who were sitting at the table; at the
row of white bottles of water and red bottles of wine that ran between
the English people; at the portraits of the late Queen and the late
Poet Laureate that hung behind the English people, heavily framed; at
the notice of the English church (Rev. Cuthbert Eager, M. A. Oxon.),
that was the only other decoration of the wall. “Charlotte, don’t you
feel, too, that we might be in London? I can hardly believe that all
kinds of other things are just outside. I suppose it is one’s being so
tired.”

“This meat has surely been used for soup,” said Miss Bartlett, laying
down her fork.

“I want so to see the Arno. The rooms the Signora promised us in her
letter would have looked over the Arno. The Signora had no business to
do it at all. Oh, it is a shame!”

“Any nook does for me,” Miss Bartlett continued; “but it does seem hard
that you shouldn’t have a view.”

Lucy felt that she had been selfish. “Charlotte, you mustn’t spoil me:
of course, you must look over the Arno, too. I meant that. The first
vacant room in the front—” “You must have it,” said Miss Bartlett, part
of whose travelling expenses were paid by Lucy’s mother—a piece of
generosity to which she made many a tactful allusion.

“No, no. You must have it.”

“I insist on it. Your mother would never forgive me, Lucy.”

“She would never forgive _me_.”

The ladies’ voices grew animated, and—if the sad truth be owned—a
little peevish. They were tired, and under the guise of unselfishness
they wrangled. Some of their neighbours interchanged glances, and one
of them—one of the ill-bred people whom one does meet abroad—leant
forward over the table and actually intruded into their argument. He
said:

“I have a view, I have a view.”

Miss Bartlett was startled. Generally at a pension people looked them
over for a day or two before speaking, and often did not find out that
they would “do” till they had gone. She knew that the intruder was
ill-bred, even before she glanced at him. He was an old man, of heavy
build, with a fair, shaven face and large eyes. There was something
childish in those eyes, though it was not the childishness of senility.
What exactly it was Miss Bartlett did not stop to consider, for her
glance passed on to his clothes. These did not attract her. He was
probably trying to become acquainted with them before they got into the
swim. So she assumed a dazed expression when he spoke to her, and then
said: “A view? Oh, a view! How delightful a view is!”

“This is my son,” said the old man; “his name’s George. He has a view
too.”

“Ah,” said Miss Bartlett, repressing Lucy, who was about to speak.

“What I mean,” he continued, “is that you can have our rooms, and we’ll
have yours. We’ll change.”

The better class of tourist was shocked at this, and sympathized with
the new-comers. Miss Bartlett, in reply, opened her mouth as little as
possible, and said “Thank you very much indeed; that is out of the
question.”

“Why?” said the old man, with both fists on the table.

“Because it is quite out of the question, thank you.”

“You see, we don’t like to take—” began Lucy. Her cousin again
repressed her.

“But why?” he persisted. “Women like looking at a view; men don’t.” And
he thumped with his fists like a naughty child, and turned to his son,
saying, “George, persuade them!”

“It’s so obvious they should have the rooms,” said the son. “There’s
nothing else to say.”

He did not look at the ladies as he spoke, but his voice was perplexed
and sorrowful. Lucy, too, was perplexed; but she saw that they were in
for what is known as “quite a scene,” and she had an odd feeling that
whenever these ill-bred tourists spoke the contest widened and deepened
till it dealt, not with rooms and views, but with—well, with something
quite different, whose existence she had not realized before. Now the
old man attacked Miss Bartlett almost violently: Why should she not
change? What possible objection had she? They would clear out in half
an hour.

Miss Bartlett, though skilled in the delicacies of conversation, was
powerless in the presence of brutality. It was impossible to snub any
one so gross. Her face reddened with displeasure. She looked around as
much as to say, “Are you all like this?” And two little old ladies, who
were sitting further up the table, with shawls hanging over the backs
of the chairs, looked back, clearly indicating “We are not; we are
genteel.”

“Eat your dinner, dear,” she said to Lucy, and began to toy again with
the meat that she had once censured.

Lucy mumbled that those seemed very odd people opposite.

“Eat your dinner, dear. This pension is a failure. To-morrow we will
make a change.”

Hardly had she announced this fell decision when she reversed it. The
curtains at the end of the room parted, and revealed a clergyman, stout
but attractive, who hurried forward to take his place at the table,
cheerfully apologizing for his lateness. Lucy, who had not yet acquired
decency, at once rose to her feet, exclaiming: “Oh, oh! Why, it’s Mr.
Beebe! Oh, how perfectly lovely! Oh, Charlotte, we must stop now,
however bad the rooms are. Oh!”

Miss Bartlett said, with more restraint:

“How do you do, Mr. Beebe? I expect that you have forgotten us: Miss
Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch, who were at Tunbridge Wells when you
helped the Vicar of St. Peter’s that very cold Easter.”

The clergyman, who had the air of one on a holiday, did not remember
the ladies quite as clearly as they remembered him. But he came forward
pleasantly enough and accepted the chair into which he was beckoned by
Lucy.

“I _am_ so glad to see you,” said the girl, who was in a state of
spiritual starvation, and would have been glad to see the waiter if her
cousin had permitted it. “Just fancy how small the world is. Summer
Street, too, makes it so specially funny.”

“Miss Honeychurch lives in the parish of Summer Street,” said Miss
Bartlett, filling up the gap, “and she happened to tell me in the
course of conversation that you have just accepted the living—”

“Yes, I heard from mother so last week. She didn’t know that I knew you
at Tunbridge Wells; but I wrote back at once, and I said: ‘Mr. Beebe
is—’”

“Quite right,” said the clergyman. “I move into the Rectory at Summer
Street next June. I am lucky to be appointed to such a charming
neighbourhood.”

“Oh, how glad I am! The name of our house is Windy Corner.” Mr. Beebe
bowed.

“There is mother and me generally, and my brother, though it’s not
often we get him to ch—— The church is rather far off, I mean.”

“Lucy, dearest, let Mr. Beebe eat his dinner.”

“I am eating it, thank you, and enjoying it.”

He preferred to talk to Lucy, whose playing he remembered, rather than
to Miss Bartlett, who probably remembered his sermons. He asked the
girl whether she knew Florence well, and was informed at some length
that she had never been there before. It is delightful to advise a
newcomer, and he was first in the field. “Don’t neglect the country
round,” his advice concluded. “The first fine afternoon drive up to
Fiesole, and round by Settignano, or something of that sort.”

“No!” cried a voice from the top of the table. “Mr. Beebe, you are
wrong. The first fine afternoon your ladies must go to Prato.”

“That lady looks so clever,” whispered Miss Bartlett to her cousin. “We
are in luck.”

And, indeed, a perfect torrent of information burst on them. People
told them what to see, when to see it, how to stop the electric trams,
how to get rid of the beggars, how much to give for a vellum blotter,
how much the place would grow upon them. The Pension Bertolini had
decided, almost enthusiastically, that they would do. Whichever way
they looked, kind ladies smiled and shouted at them. And above all rose
the voice of the clever lady, crying: “Prato! They must go to Prato.
That place is too sweetly squalid for words. I love it; I revel in
shaking off the trammels of respectability, as you know.”

The young man named George glanced at the clever lady, and then
returned moodily to his plate. Obviously he and his father did not do.
Lucy, in the midst of her success, found time to wish they did. It gave
her no extra pleasure that any one should be left in the cold; and when
she rose to go, she turned back and gave the two outsiders a nervous
little bow.

The father did not see it; the son acknowledged it, not by another bow,
but by raising his eyebrows and smiling; he seemed to be smiling across
something.

She hastened after her cousin, who had already disappeared through the
curtains—curtains which smote one in the face, and seemed heavy with
more than cloth. Beyond them stood the unreliable Signora, bowing
good-evening to her guests, and supported by ’Enery, her little boy,
and Victorier, her daughter. It made a curious little scene, this
attempt of the Cockney to convey the grace and geniality of the South.
And even more curious was the drawing-room, which attempted to rival
the solid comfort of a Bloomsbury boarding-house. Was this really
Italy?

Miss Bartlett was already seated on a tightly stuffed arm-chair, which
had the colour and the contours of a tomato. She was talking to Mr.
Beebe, and as she spoke, her long narrow head drove backwards and
forwards, slowly, regularly, as though she were demolishing some
invisible obstacle. “We are most grateful to you,” she was saying. “The
first evening means so much. When you arrived we were in for a
peculiarly _mauvais quart d’heure_.”

He expressed his regret.

“Do you, by any chance, know the name of an old man who sat opposite us
at dinner?”

“Emerson.”

“Is he a friend of yours?”

“We are friendly—as one is in pensions.”

“Then I will say no more.”

He pressed her very slightly, and she said more.

“I am, as it were,” she concluded, “the chaperon of my young cousin,
Lucy, and it would be a serious thing if I put her under an obligation
to people of whom we know nothing. His manner was somewhat unfortunate.
I hope I acted for the best.”

“You acted very naturally,” said he. He seemed thoughtful, and after a
few moments added: “All the same, I don’t think much harm would have
come of accepting.”

“No _harm_, of course. But we could not be under an obligation.”

“He is rather a peculiar man.” Again he hesitated, and then said
gently: “I think he would not take advantage of your acceptance, nor
expect you to show gratitude. He has the merit—if it is one—of saying
exactly what he means. He has rooms he does not value, and he thinks
you would value them. He no more thought of putting you under an
obligation than he thought of being polite. It is so difficult—at
least, I find it difficult—to understand people who speak the truth.”

Lucy was pleased, and said: “I was hoping that he was nice; I do so
always hope that people will be nice.”

“I think he is; nice and tiresome. I differ from him on almost every
point of any importance, and so, I expect—I may say I hope—you will
differ. But his is a type one disagrees with rather than deplores. When
he first came here he not unnaturally put people’s backs up. He has no
tact and no manners—I don’t mean by that that he has bad manners—and he
will not keep his opinions to himself. We nearly complained about him
to our depressing Signora, but I am glad to say we thought better of
it.”

“Am I to conclude,” said Miss Bartlett, “that he is a Socialist?”

Mr. Beebe accepted the convenient word, not without a slight twitching
of the lips.

“And presumably he has brought up his son to be a Socialist, too?”

“I hardly know George, for he hasn’t learnt to talk yet. He seems a
nice creature, and I think he has brains. Of course, he has all his
father’s mannerisms, and it is quite possible that he, too, may be a
Socialist.”

“Oh, you relieve me,” said Miss Bartlett. “So you think I ought to have
accepted their offer? You feel I have been narrow-minded and
suspicious?”

“Not at all,” he answered; “I never suggested that.”

“But ought I not to apologize, at all events, for my apparent
rudeness?”

He replied, with some irritation, that it would be quite unnecessary,
and got up from his seat to go to the smoking-room.

“Was I a bore?” said Miss Bartlett, as soon as he had disappeared. “Why
didn’t you talk, Lucy? He prefers young people, I’m sure. I do hope I
haven’t monopolized him. I hoped you would have him all the evening, as
well as all dinner-time.”

“He is nice,” exclaimed Lucy. “Just what I remember. He seems to see
good in everyone. No one would take him for a clergyman.”

“My dear Lucia—”

“Well, you know what I mean. And you know how clergymen generally
laugh; Mr. Beebe laughs just like an ordinary man.”

“Funny girl! How you do remind me of your mother. I wonder if she will
approve of Mr. Beebe.”

“I’m sure she will; and so will Freddy.”

“I think everyone at Windy Corner will approve; it is the fashionable
world. I am used to Tunbridge Wells, where we are all hopelessly behind
the times.”

“Yes,” said Lucy despondently.

There was a haze of disapproval in the air, but whether the disapproval
was of herself, or of Mr. Beebe, or of the fashionable world at Windy
Corner, or of the narrow world at Tunbridge Wells, she could not
determine. She tried to locate it, but as usual she blundered. Miss
Bartlett sedulously denied disapproving of any one, and added “I am
afraid you are finding me a very depressing companion.”

And the girl again thought: “I must have been selfish or unkind; I must
be more careful. It is so dreadful for Charlotte, being poor.”

Fortunately one of the little old ladies, who for some time had been
smiling very benignly, now approached and asked if she might be allowed
to sit where Mr. Beebe had sat. Permission granted, she began to
chatter gently about Italy, the plunge it had been to come there, the
gratifying success of the plunge, the improvement in her sister’s
health, the necessity of closing the bed-room windows at night, and of
thoroughly emptying the water-bottles in the morning. She handled her
subjects agreeably, and they were, perhaps, more worthy of attention
than the high discourse upon Guelfs and Ghibellines which was
proceeding tempestuously at the other end of the room. It was a real
catastrophe, not a mere episode, that evening of hers at Venice, when
she had found in her bedroom something that is one worse than a flea,
though one better than something else.

“But here you are as safe as in England. Signora Bertolini is so
English.”

“Yet our rooms smell,” said poor Lucy. “We dread going to bed.”

“Ah, then you look into the court.” She sighed. “If only Mr. Emerson
was more tactful! We were so sorry for you at dinner.”

“I think he was meaning to be kind.”

“Undoubtedly he was,” said Miss Bartlett.

“Mr. Beebe has just been scolding me for my suspicious nature. Of
course, I was holding back on my cousin’s account.”

“Of course,” said the little old lady; and they murmured that one could
not be too careful with a young girl.

Lucy tried to look demure, but could not help feeling a great fool. No
one was careful with her at home; or, at all events, she had not
noticed it.

“About old Mr. Emerson—I hardly know. No, he is not tactful; yet, have
you ever noticed that there are people who do things which are most
indelicate, and yet at the same time—beautiful?”

“Beautiful?” said Miss Bartlett, puzzled at the word. “Are not beauty
and delicacy the same?”

“So one would have thought,” said the other helplessly. “But things are
so difficult, I sometimes think.”

She proceeded no further into things, for Mr. Beebe reappeared, looking
extremely pleasant.

“Miss Bartlett,” he cried, “it’s all right about the rooms. I’m so
glad. Mr. Emerson was talking about it in the smoking-room, and knowing
what I did, I encouraged him to make the offer again. He has let me
come and ask you. He would be so pleased.”

“Oh, Charlotte,” cried Lucy to her cousin, “we must have the rooms now.
The old man is just as nice and kind as he can be.”

Miss Bartlett was silent.

“I fear,” said Mr. Beebe, after a pause, “that I have been officious. I
must apologize for my interference.”

Gravely displeased, he turned to go. Not till then did Miss Bartlett
reply: “My own wishes, dearest Lucy, are unimportant in comparison with
yours. It would be hard indeed if I stopped you doing as you liked at
Florence, when I am only here through your kindness. If you wish me to
turn these gentlemen out of their rooms, I will do it. Would you then,
Mr. Beebe, kindly tell Mr. Emerson that I accept his kind offer, and
then conduct him to me, in order that I may thank him personally?”

She raised her voice as she spoke; it was heard all over the
drawing-room, and silenced the Guelfs and the Ghibellines. The
clergyman, inwardly cursing the female sex, bowed, and departed with
her message.

“Remember, Lucy, I alone am implicated in this. I do not wish the
acceptance to come from you. Grant me that, at all events.”

Mr. Beebe was back, saying rather nervously:

“Mr. Emerson is engaged, but here is his son instead.”

The young man gazed down on the three ladies, who felt seated on the
floor, so low were their chairs.

“My father,” he said, “is in his bath, so you cannot thank him
personally. But any message given by you to me will be given by me to
him as soon as he comes out.”

Miss Bartlett was unequal to the bath. All her barbed civilities came
forth wrong end first. Young Mr. Emerson scored a notable triumph to
the delight of Mr. Beebe and to the secret delight of Lucy.

“Poor young man!” said Miss Bartlett, as soon as he had gone.

“How angry he is with his father about the rooms! It is all he can do
to keep polite.”

“In half an hour or so your rooms will be ready,” said Mr. Beebe. Then
looking rather thoughtfully at the two cousins, he retired to his own
rooms, to write up his philosophic diary.

“Oh, dear!” breathed the little old lady, and shuddered as if all the
winds of heaven had entered the apartment. “Gentlemen sometimes do not
realize—” Her voice faded away, but Miss Bartlett seemed to understand
and a conversation developed, in which gentlemen who did not thoroughly
realize played a principal part. Lucy, not realizing either, was
reduced to literature. Taking up Baedeker’s Handbook to Northern Italy,
she committed to memory the most important dates of Florentine History.
For she was determined to enjoy herself on the morrow. Thus the
half-hour crept profitably away, and at last Miss Bartlett rose with a
sigh, and said:

“I think one might venture now. No, Lucy, do not stir. I will
superintend the move.”

“How you do do everything,” said Lucy.

“Naturally, dear. It is my affair.”

“But I would like to help you.”

“No, dear.”

Charlotte’s energy! And her unselfishness! She had been thus all her
life, but really, on this Italian tour, she was surpassing herself. So
Lucy felt, or strove to feel. And yet—there was a rebellious spirit in
her which wondered whether the acceptance might not have been less
delicate and more beautiful. At all events, she entered her own room
without any feeling of joy.

“I want to explain,” said Miss Bartlett, “why it is that I have taken
the largest room. Naturally, of course, I should have given it to you;
but I happen to know that it belongs to the young man, and I was sure
your mother would not like it.”

Lucy was bewildered.

“If you are to accept a favour it is more suitable you should be under
an obligation to his father than to him. I am a woman of the world, in
my small way, and I know where things lead to. However, Mr. Beebe is a
guarantee of a sort that they will not presume on this.”

“Mother wouldn’t mind I’m sure,” said Lucy, but again had the sense of
larger and unsuspected issues.

Miss Bartlett only sighed, and enveloped her in a protecting embrace as
she wished her good-night. It gave Lucy the sensation of a fog, and
when she reached her own room she opened the window and breathed the
clean night air, thinking of the kind old man who had enabled her to
see the lights dancing in the Arno and the cypresses of San Miniato,
and the foot-hills of the Apennines, black against the rising moon.

Miss Bartlett, in her room, fastened the window-shutters and locked the
door, and then made a tour of the apartment to see where the cupboards
led, and whether there were any oubliettes or secret entrances. It was
then that she saw, pinned up over the washstand, a sheet of paper on
which was scrawled an enormous note of interrogation. Nothing more.

“What does it mean?” she thought, and she examined it carefully by the
light of a candle. Meaningless at first, it gradually became menacing,
obnoxious, portentous with evil. She was seized with an impulse to
destroy it, but fortunately remembered that she had no right to do so,
since it must be the property of young Mr. Emerson. So she unpinned it
carefully, and put it between two pieces of blotting-paper to keep it
clean for him. Then she completed her inspection of the room, sighed
heavily according to her habit, and went to bed.




Chapter II
In Santa Croce with No Baedeker


It was pleasant to wake up in Florence, to open the eyes upon a bright
bare room, with a floor of red tiles which look clean though they are
not; with a painted ceiling whereon pink griffins and blue amorini
sport in a forest of yellow violins and bassoons. It was pleasant, too,
to fling wide the windows, pinching the fingers in unfamiliar
fastenings, to lean out into sunshine with beautiful hills and trees
and marble churches opposite, and close below, the Arno, gurgling
against the embankment of the road.

Over the river men were at work with spades and sieves on the sandy
foreshore, and on the river was a boat, also diligently employed for
some mysterious end. An electric tram came rushing underneath the
window. No one was inside it, except one tourist; but its platforms
were overflowing with Italians, who preferred to stand. Children tried
to hang on behind, and the conductor, with no malice, spat in their
faces to make them let go. Then soldiers appeared—good-looking,
undersized men—wearing each a knapsack covered with mangy fur, and a
great-coat which had been cut for some larger soldier. Beside them
walked officers, looking foolish and fierce, and before them went
little boys, turning somersaults in time with the band. The tramcar
became entangled in their ranks, and moved on painfully, like a
caterpillar in a swarm of ants. One of the little boys fell down, and
some white bullocks came out of an archway. Indeed, if it had not been
for the good advice of an old man who was selling button-hooks, the
road might never have got clear.

Over such trivialities as these many a valuable hour may slip away, and
the traveller who has gone to Italy to study the tactile values of
Giotto, or the corruption of the Papacy, may return remembering nothing
but the blue sky and the men and women who live under it. So it was as
well that Miss Bartlett should tap and come in, and having commented on
Lucy’s leaving the door unlocked, and on her leaning out of the window
before she was fully dressed, should urge her to hasten herself, or the
best of the day would be gone. By the time Lucy was ready her cousin
had done her breakfast, and was listening to the clever lady among the
crumbs.

A conversation then ensued, on not unfamiliar lines. Miss Bartlett was,
after all, a wee bit tired, and thought they had better spend the
morning settling in; unless Lucy would at all like to go out? Lucy
would rather like to go out, as it was her first day in Florence, but,
of course, she could go alone. Miss Bartlett could not allow this. Of
course she would accompany Lucy everywhere. Oh, certainly not; Lucy
would stop with her cousin. Oh, no! that would never do. Oh, yes!

At this point the clever lady broke in.

“If it is Mrs. Grundy who is troubling you, I do assure you that you
can neglect the good person. Being English, Miss Honeychurch will be
perfectly safe. Italians understand. A dear friend of mine, Contessa
Baroncelli, has two daughters, and when she cannot send a maid to
school with them, she lets them go in sailor-hats instead. Every one
takes them for English, you see, especially if their hair is strained
tightly behind.”

Miss Bartlett was unconvinced by the safety of Contessa Baroncelli’s
daughters. She was determined to take Lucy herself, her head not being
so very bad. The clever lady then said that she was going to spend a
long morning in Santa Croce, and if Lucy would come too, she would be
delighted.

“I will take you by a dear dirty back way, Miss Honeychurch, and if you
bring me luck, we shall have an adventure.”

Lucy said that this was most kind, and at once opened the Baedeker, to
see where Santa Croce was.

“Tut, tut! Miss Lucy! I hope we shall soon emancipate you from
Baedeker. He does but touch the surface of things. As to the true
Italy—he does not even dream of it. The true Italy is only to be found
by patient observation.”

This sounded very interesting, and Lucy hurried over her breakfast, and
started with her new friend in high spirits. Italy was coming at last.
The Cockney Signora and her works had vanished like a bad dream.

Miss Lavish—for that was the clever lady’s name—turned to the right
along the sunny Lung’ Arno. How delightfully warm! But a wind down the
side streets cut like a knife, didn’t it? Ponte alle
Grazie—particularly interesting, mentioned by Dante. San
Miniato—beautiful as well as interesting; the crucifix that kissed a
murderer—Miss Honeychurch would remember the story. The men on the
river were fishing. (Untrue; but then, so is most information.) Then
Miss Lavish darted under the archway of the white bullocks, and she
stopped, and she cried:

“A smell! a true Florentine smell! Every city, let me teach you, has
its own smell.”

“Is it a very nice smell?” said Lucy, who had inherited from her mother
a distaste to dirt.

“One doesn’t come to Italy for niceness,” was the retort; “one comes
for life. Buon giorno! Buon giorno!” bowing right and left. “Look at
that adorable wine-cart! How the driver stares at us, dear, simple
soul!”

So Miss Lavish proceeded through the streets of the city of Florence,
short, fidgety, and playful as a kitten, though without a kitten’s
grace. It was a treat for the girl to be with any one so clever and so
cheerful; and a blue military cloak, such as an Italian officer wears,
only increased the sense of festivity.

“Buon giorno! Take the word of an old woman, Miss Lucy: you will never
repent of a little civility to your inferiors. _That_ is the true
democracy. Though I am a real Radical as well. There, now you’re
shocked.”

“Indeed, I’m not!” exclaimed Lucy. “We are Radicals, too, out and out.
My father always voted for Mr. Gladstone, until he was so dreadful
about Ireland.”

“I see, I see. And now you have gone over to the enemy.”

“Oh, please—! If my father was alive, I am sure he would vote Radical
again now that Ireland is all right. And as it is, the glass over our
front door was broken last election, and Freddy is sure it was the
Tories; but mother says nonsense, a tramp.”

“Shameful! A manufacturing district, I suppose?”

“No—in the Surrey hills. About five miles from Dorking, looking over
the Weald.”

Miss Lavish seemed interested, and slackened her trot.

“What a delightful part; I know it so well. It is full of the very
nicest people. Do you know Sir Harry Otway—a Radical if ever there
was?”

“Very well indeed.”

“And old Mrs. Butterworth the philanthropist?”

“Why, she rents a field of us! How funny!”

Miss Lavish looked at the narrow ribbon of sky, and murmured: “Oh, you
have property in Surrey?”

“Hardly any,” said Lucy, fearful of being thought a snob. “Only thirty
acres—just the garden, all downhill, and some fields.”

Miss Lavish was not disgusted, and said it was just the size of her
aunt’s Suffolk estate. Italy receded. They tried to remember the last
name of Lady Louisa someone, who had taken a house near Summer Street
the other year, but she had not liked it, which was odd of her. And
just as Miss Lavish had got the name, she broke off and exclaimed:

“Bless us! Bless us and save us! We’ve lost the way.”

Certainly they had seemed a long time in reaching Santa Croce, the
tower of which had been plainly visible from the landing window. But
Miss Lavish had said so much about knowing her Florence by heart, that
Lucy had followed her with no misgivings.

“Lost! lost! My dear Miss Lucy, during our political diatribes we have
taken a wrong turning. How those horrid Conservatives would jeer at us!
What are we to do? Two lone females in an unknown town. Now, this is
what _I_ call an adventure.”

Lucy, who wanted to see Santa Croce, suggested, as a possible solution,
that they should ask the way there.

“Oh, but that is the word of a craven! And no, you are not, not, _not_
to look at your Baedeker. Give it to me; I shan’t let you carry it. We
will simply drift.”

Accordingly they drifted through a series of those grey-brown streets,
neither commodious nor picturesque, in which the eastern quarter of the
city abounds. Lucy soon lost interest in the discontent of Lady Louisa,
and became discontented herself. For one ravishing moment Italy
appeared. She stood in the Square of the Annunziata and saw in the
living terra-cotta those divine babies whom no cheap reproduction can
ever stale. There they stood, with their shining limbs bursting from
the garments of charity, and their strong white arms extended against
circlets of heaven. Lucy thought she had never seen anything more
beautiful; but Miss Lavish, with a shriek of dismay, dragged her
forward, declaring that they were out of their path now by at least a
mile.

The hour was approaching at which the continental breakfast begins, or
rather ceases, to tell, and the ladies bought some hot chestnut paste
out of a little shop, because it looked so typical. It tasted partly of
the paper in which it was wrapped, partly of hair oil, partly of the
great unknown. But it gave them strength to drift into another Piazza,
large and dusty, on the farther side of which rose a black-and-white
façade of surpassing ugliness. Miss Lavish spoke to it dramatically. It
was Santa Croce. The adventure was over.

“Stop a minute; let those two people go on, or I shall have to speak to
them. I do detest conventional intercourse. Nasty! they are going into
the church, too. Oh, the Britisher abroad!”

“We sat opposite them at dinner last night. They have given us their
rooms. They were so very kind.”

“Look at their figures!” laughed Miss Lavish. “They walk through my
Italy like a pair of cows. It’s very naughty of me, but I would like to
set an examination paper at Dover, and turn back every tourist who
couldn’t pass it.”

“What would you ask us?”

Miss Lavish laid her hand pleasantly on Lucy’s arm, as if to suggest
that she, at all events, would get full marks. In this exalted mood
they reached the steps of the great church, and were about to enter it
when Miss Lavish stopped, squeaked, flung up her arms, and cried:

“There goes my local-colour box! I must have a word with him!”

And in a moment she was away over the Piazza, her military cloak
flapping in the wind; nor did she slacken speed till she caught up an
old man with white whiskers, and nipped him playfully upon the arm.

Lucy waited for nearly ten minutes. Then she began to get tired. The
beggars worried her, the dust blew in her eyes, and she remembered that
a young girl ought not to loiter in public places. She descended slowly
into the Piazza with the intention of rejoining Miss Lavish, who was
really almost too original. But at that moment Miss Lavish and her
local-colour box moved also, and disappeared down a side street, both
gesticulating largely. Tears of indignation came to Lucy’s eyes partly
because Miss Lavish had jilted her, partly because she had taken her
Baedeker. How could she find her way home? How could she find her way
about in Santa Croce? Her first morning was ruined, and she might never
be in Florence again. A few minutes ago she had been all high spirits,
talking as a woman of culture, and half persuading herself that she was
full of originality. Now she entered the church depressed and
humiliated, not even able to remember whether it was built by the
Franciscans or the Dominicans. Of course, it must be a wonderful
building. But how like a barn! And how very cold! Of course, it
contained frescoes by Giotto, in the presence of whose tactile values
she was capable of feeling what was proper. But who was to tell her
which they were? She walked about disdainfully, unwilling to be
enthusiastic over monuments of uncertain authorship or date. There was
no one even to tell her which, of all the sepulchral slabs that paved
the nave and transepts, was the one that was really beautiful, the one
that had been most praised by Mr. Ruskin.

Then the pernicious charm of Italy worked on her, and, instead of
acquiring information, she began to be happy. She puzzled out the
Italian notices—the notices that forbade people to introduce dogs into
the church—the notice that prayed people, in the interest of health and
out of respect to the sacred edifice in which they found themselves,
not to spit. She watched the tourists; their noses were as red as their
Baedekers, so cold was Santa Croce. She beheld the horrible fate that
overtook three Papists—two he-babies and a she-baby—who began their
career by sousing each other with the Holy Water, and then proceeded to
the Machiavelli memorial, dripping but hallowed. Advancing towards it
very slowly and from immense distances, they touched the stone with
their fingers, with their handkerchiefs, with their heads, and then
retreated. What could this mean? They did it again and again. Then Lucy
realized that they had mistaken Machiavelli for some saint, hoping to
acquire virtue. Punishment followed quickly. The smallest he-baby
stumbled over one of the sepulchral slabs so much admired by Mr.
Ruskin, and entangled his feet in the features of a recumbent bishop.
Protestant as she was, Lucy darted forward. She was too late. He fell
heavily upon the prelate’s upturned toes.

“Hateful bishop!” exclaimed the voice of old Mr. Emerson, who had
darted forward also. “Hard in life, hard in death. Go out into the
sunshine, little boy, and kiss your hand to the sun, for that is where
you ought to be. Intolerable bishop!”

The child screamed frantically at these words, and at these dreadful
people who picked him up, dusted him, rubbed his bruises, and told him
not to be superstitious.

“Look at him!” said Mr. Emerson to Lucy. “Here’s a mess: a baby hurt,
cold, and frightened! But what else can you expect from a church?”

The child’s legs had become as melting wax. Each time that old Mr.
Emerson and Lucy set it erect it collapsed with a roar. Fortunately an
Italian lady, who ought to have been saying her prayers, came to the
rescue. By some mysterious virtue, which mothers alone possess, she
stiffened the little boy’s back-bone and imparted strength to his
knees. He stood. Still gibbering with agitation, he walked away.

“You are a clever woman,” said Mr. Emerson. “You have done more than
all the relics in the world. I am not of your creed, but I do believe
in those who make their fellow-creatures happy. There is no scheme of
the universe—”

He paused for a phrase.

“Niente,” said the Italian lady, and returned to her prayers.

“I’m not sure she understands English,” suggested Lucy.

In her chastened mood she no longer despised the Emersons. She was
determined to be gracious to them, beautiful rather than delicate, and,
if possible, to erase Miss Bartlett’s civility by some gracious
reference to the pleasant rooms.

“That woman understands everything,” was Mr. Emerson’s reply. “But what
are you doing here? Are you doing the church? Are you through with the
church?”

“No,” cried Lucy, remembering her grievance. “I came here with Miss
Lavish, who was to explain everything; and just by the door—it is too
bad!—she simply ran away, and after waiting quite a time, I had to come
in by myself.”

“Why shouldn’t you?” said Mr. Emerson.

“Yes, why shouldn’t you come by yourself?” said the son, addressing the
young lady for the first time.

“But Miss Lavish has even taken away Baedeker.”

“Baedeker?” said Mr. Emerson. “I’m glad it’s _that_ you minded. It’s
worth minding, the loss of a Baedeker. _That’s_ worth minding.”

Lucy was puzzled. She was again conscious of some new idea, and was not
sure whither it would lead her.

“If you’ve no Baedeker,” said the son, “you’d better join us.” Was this
where the idea would lead? She took refuge in her dignity.

“Thank you very much, but I could not think of that. I hope you do not
suppose that I came to join on to you. I really came to help with the
child, and to thank you for so kindly giving us your rooms last night.
I hope that you have not been put to any great inconvenience.”

“My dear,” said the old man gently, “I think that you are repeating
what you have heard older people say. You are pretending to be touchy;
but you are not really. Stop being so tiresome, and tell me instead
what part of the church you want to see. To take you to it will be a
real pleasure.”

Now, this was abominably impertinent, and she ought to have been
furious. But it is sometimes as difficult to lose one’s temper as it is
difficult at other times to keep it. Lucy could not get cross. Mr.
Emerson was an old man, and surely a girl might humour him. On the
other hand, his son was a young man, and she felt that a girl ought to
be offended with him, or at all events be offended before him. It was
at him that she gazed before replying.

“I am not touchy, I hope. It is the Giottos that I want to see, if you
will kindly tell me which they are.”

The son nodded. With a look of sombre satisfaction, he led the way to
the Peruzzi Chapel. There was a hint of the teacher about him. She felt
like a child in school who had answered a question rightly.

The chapel was already filled with an earnest congregation, and out of
them rose the voice of a lecturer, directing them how to worship
Giotto, not by tactful valuations, but by the standards of the spirit.

“Remember,” he was saying, “the facts about this church of Santa Croce;
how it was built by faith in the full fervour of medievalism, before
any taint of the Renaissance had appeared. Observe how Giotto in these
frescoes—now, unhappily, ruined by restoration—is untroubled by the
snares of anatomy and perspective. Could anything be more majestic,
more pathetic, beautiful, true? How little, we feel, avails knowledge
and technical cleverness against a man who truly feels!”

“No!” exclaimed Mr. Emerson, in much too loud a voice for church.
“Remember nothing of the sort! Built by faith indeed! That simply means
the workmen weren’t paid properly. And as for the frescoes, I see no
truth in them. Look at that fat man in blue! He must weigh as much as I
do, and he is shooting into the sky like an air balloon.”

He was referring to the fresco of the “Ascension of St. John.” Inside,
the lecturer’s voice faltered, as well it might. The audience shifted
uneasily, and so did Lucy. She was sure that she ought not to be with
these men; but they had cast a spell over her. They were so serious and
so strange that she could not remember how to behave.

“Now, did this happen, or didn’t it? Yes or no?”

George replied:

“It happened like this, if it happened at all. I would rather go up to
heaven by myself than be pushed by cherubs; and if I got there I should
like my friends to lean out of it, just as they do here.”

“You will never go up,” said his father. “You and I, dear boy, will lie
at peace in the earth that bore us, and our names will disappear as
surely as our work survives.”

“Some of the people can only see the empty grave, not the saint,
whoever he is, going up. It did happen like that, if it happened at
all.”

“Pardon me,” said a frigid voice. “The chapel is somewhat small for two
parties. We will incommode you no longer.”

The lecturer was a clergyman, and his audience must be also his flock,
for they held prayer-books as well as guide-books in their hands. They
filed out of the chapel in silence. Amongst them were the two little
old ladies of the Pension Bertolini—Miss Teresa and Miss Catherine
Alan.

“Stop!” cried Mr. Emerson. “There’s plenty of room for us all. Stop!”

The procession disappeared without a word.

Soon the lecturer could be heard in the next chapel, describing the
life of St. Francis.

“George, I do believe that clergyman is the Brixton curate.”

George went into the next chapel and returned, saying “Perhaps he is. I
don’t remember.”

“Then I had better speak to him and remind him who I am. It’s that Mr.
Eager. Why did he go? Did we talk too loud? How vexatious. I shall go
and say we are sorry. Hadn’t I better? Then perhaps he will come back.”

“He will not come back,” said George.

But Mr. Emerson, contrite and unhappy, hurried away to apologize to the
Rev. Cuthbert Eager. Lucy, apparently absorbed in a lunette, could hear
the lecture again interrupted, the anxious, aggressive voice of the old
man, the curt, injured replies of his opponent. The son, who took every
little contretemps as if it were a tragedy, was listening also.

“My father has that effect on nearly everyone,” he informed her. “He
will try to be kind.”

“I hope we all try,” said she, smiling nervously.

“Because we think it improves our characters. But he is kind to people
because he loves them; and they find him out, and are offended, or
frightened.”

“How silly of them!” said Lucy, though in her heart she sympathized; “I
think that a kind action done tactfully—”

“Tact!”

He threw up his head in disdain. Apparently she had given the wrong
answer. She watched the singular creature pace up and down the chapel.
For a young man his face was rugged, and—until the shadows fell upon
it—hard. Enshadowed, it sprang into tenderness. She saw him once again
at Rome, on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, carrying a burden of
acorns. Healthy and muscular, he yet gave her the feeling of greyness,
of tragedy that might only find solution in the night. The feeling soon
passed; it was unlike her to have entertained anything so subtle. Born
of silence and of unknown emotion, it passed when Mr. Emerson returned,
and she could re-enter the world of rapid talk, which was alone
familiar to her.

“Were you snubbed?” asked his son tranquilly.

“But we have spoilt the pleasure of I don’t know how many people. They
won’t come back.”

“...full of innate sympathy...quickness to perceive good in
others...vision of the brotherhood of man...” Scraps of the lecture on
St. Francis came floating round the partition wall.

“Don’t let us spoil yours,” he continued to Lucy. “Have you looked at
those saints?”

“Yes,” said Lucy. “They are lovely. Do you know which is the tombstone
that is praised in Ruskin?”

He did not know, and suggested that they should try to guess it.
George, rather to her relief, refused to move, and she and the old man
wandered not unpleasantly about Santa Croce, which, though it is like a
barn, has harvested many beautiful things inside its walls. There were
also beggars to avoid and guides to dodge round the pillars, and an old
lady with her dog, and here and there a priest modestly edging to his
Mass through the groups of tourists. But Mr. Emerson was only half
interested. He watched the lecturer, whose success he believed he had
impaired, and then he anxiously watched his son.

“Why will he look at that fresco?” he said uneasily. “I saw nothing in
it.”

“I like Giotto,” she replied. “It is so wonderful what they say about
his tactile values. Though I like things like the Della Robbia babies
better.”

“So you ought. A baby is worth a dozen saints. And my baby’s worth the
whole of Paradise, and as far as I can see he lives in Hell.”

Lucy again felt that this did not do.

“In Hell,” he repeated. “He’s unhappy.”

“Oh, dear!” said Lucy.

“How can he be unhappy when he is strong and alive? What more is one to
give him? And think how he has been brought up—free from all the
superstition and ignorance that lead men to hate one another in the
name of God. With such an education as that, I thought he was bound to
grow up happy.”

She was no theologian, but she felt that here was a very foolish old
man, as well as a very irreligious one. She also felt that her mother
might not like her talking to that kind of person, and that Charlotte
would object most strongly.

“What are we to do with him?” he asked. “He comes out for his holiday
to Italy, and behaves—like that; like the little child who ought to
have been playing, and who hurt himself upon the tombstone. Eh? What
did you say?”

Lucy had made no suggestion. Suddenly he said:

“Now don’t be stupid over this. I don’t require you to fall in love
with my boy, but I do think you might try and understand him. You are
nearer his age, and if you let yourself go I am sure you are sensible.
You might help me. He has known so few women, and you have the time.
You stop here several weeks, I suppose? But let yourself go. You are
inclined to get muddled, if I may judge from last night. Let yourself
go. Pull out from the depths those thoughts that you do not understand,
and spread them out in the sunlight and know the meaning of them. By
understanding George you may learn to understand yourself. It will be
good for both of you.”

To this extraordinary speech Lucy found no answer.

“I only know what it is that’s wrong with him; not why it is.”

“And what is it?” asked Lucy fearfully, expecting some harrowing tale.

“The old trouble; things won’t fit.”

“What things?”

“The things of the universe. It is quite true. They don’t.”

“Oh, Mr. Emerson, whatever do you mean?”

In his ordinary voice, so that she scarcely realized he was quoting
poetry, he said:

“‘From far, from eve and morning,
    And yon twelve-winded sky,
The stuff of life to knit me
    Blew hither: here am I’


George and I both know this, but why does it distress him? We know that
we come from the winds, and that we shall return to them; that all life
is perhaps a knot, a tangle, a blemish in the eternal smoothness. But
why should this make us unhappy? Let us rather love one another, and
work and rejoice. I don’t believe in this world sorrow.”

Miss Honeychurch assented.

“Then make my boy think like us. Make him realize that by the side of
the everlasting Why there is a Yes—a transitory Yes if you like, but a
Yes.”

Suddenly she laughed; surely one ought to laugh. A young man melancholy
because the universe wouldn’t fit, because life was a tangle or a wind,
or a Yes, or something!

“I’m very sorry,” she cried. “You’ll think me unfeeling, but—but—” Then
she became matronly. “Oh, but your son wants employment. Has he no
particular hobby? Why, I myself have worries, but I can generally
forget them at the piano; and collecting stamps did no end of good for
my brother. Perhaps Italy bores him; you ought to try the Alps or the
Lakes.”

The old man’s face saddened, and he touched her gently with his hand.
This did not alarm her; she thought that her advice had impressed him
and that he was thanking her for it. Indeed, he no longer alarmed her
at all; she regarded him as a kind thing, but quite silly. Her feelings
were as inflated spiritually as they had been an hour ago esthetically,
before she lost Baedeker. The dear George, now striding towards them
over the tombstones, seemed both pitiable and absurd. He approached,
his face in the shadow. He said:

“Miss Bartlett.”

“Oh, good gracious me!” said Lucy, suddenly collapsing and again seeing
the whole of life in a new perspective. “Where? Where?”

“In the nave.”

“I see. Those gossiping little Miss Alans must have—” She checked
herself.

“Poor girl!” exploded Mr. Emerson. “Poor girl!”

She could not let this pass, for it was just what she was feeling
herself.

“Poor girl? I fail to understand the point of that remark. I think
myself a very fortunate girl, I assure you. I’m thoroughly happy, and
having a splendid time. Pray don’t waste time mourning over _me_.
There’s enough sorrow in the world, isn’t there, without trying to
invent it. Good-bye. Thank you both so much for all your kindness. Ah,
yes! there does come my cousin. A delightful morning! Santa Croce is a
wonderful church.”

She joined her cousin.




Chapter III
Music, Violets, and the Letter “S”


It so happened that Lucy, who found daily life rather chaotic, entered
a more solid world when she opened the piano. She was then no longer
either deferential or patronizing; no longer either a rebel or a slave.
The kingdom of music is not the kingdom of this world; it will accept
those whom breeding and intellect and culture have alike rejected. The
commonplace person begins to play, and shoots into the empyrean without
effort, whilst we look up, marvelling how he has escaped us, and
thinking how we could worship him and love him, would he but translate
his visions into human words, and his experiences into human actions.
Perhaps he cannot; certainly he does not, or does so very seldom. Lucy
had done so never.

She was no dazzling _exécutante;_ her runs were not at all like strings
of pearls, and she struck no more right notes than was suitable for one
of her age and situation. Nor was she the passionate young lady, who
performs so tragically on a summer’s evening with the window open.
Passion was there, but it could not be easily labelled; it slipped
between love and hatred and jealousy, and all the furniture of the
pictorial style. And she was tragical only in the sense that she was
great, for she loved to play on the side of Victory. Victory of what
and over what—that is more than the words of daily life can tell us.
But that some sonatas of Beethoven are written tragic no one can
gainsay; yet they can triumph or despair as the player decides, and
Lucy had decided that they should triumph.

A very wet afternoon at the Bertolini permitted her to do the thing she
really liked, and after lunch she opened the little draped piano. A few
people lingered round and praised her playing, but finding that she
made no reply, dispersed to their rooms to write up their diaries or to
sleep. She took no notice of Mr. Emerson looking for his son, nor of
Miss Bartlett looking for Miss Lavish, nor of Miss Lavish looking for
her cigarette-case. Like every true performer, she was intoxicated by
the mere feel of the notes: they were fingers caressing her own; and by
touch, not by sound alone, did she come to her desire.

Mr. Beebe, sitting unnoticed in the window, pondered this illogical
element in Miss Honeychurch, and recalled the occasion at Tunbridge
Wells when he had discovered it. It was at one of those entertainments
where the upper classes entertain the lower. The seats were filled with
a respectful audience, and the ladies and gentlemen of the parish,
under the auspices of their vicar, sang, or recited, or imitated the
drawing of a champagne cork. Among the promised items was “Miss
Honeychurch. Piano. Beethoven,” and Mr. Beebe was wondering whether it
would be Adelaida, or the march of The Ruins of Athens, when his
composure was disturbed by the opening bars of Opus III. He was in
suspense all through the introduction, for not until the pace quickens
does one know what the performer intends. With the roar of the opening
theme he knew that things were going extraordinarily; in the chords
that herald the conclusion he heard the hammer strokes of victory. He
was glad that she only played the first movement, for he could have
paid no attention to the winding intricacies of the measures of
nine-sixteen. The audience clapped, no less respectful. It was Mr.
Beebe who started the stamping; it was all that one could do.

“Who is she?” he asked the vicar afterwards.

“Cousin of one of my parishioners. I do not consider her choice of a
piece happy. Beethoven is so usually simple and direct in his appeal
that it is sheer perversity to choose a thing like that, which, if
anything, disturbs.”

“Introduce me.”

“She will be delighted. She and Miss Bartlett are full of the praises
of your sermon.”

“My sermon?” cried Mr. Beebe. “Why ever did she listen to it?”

When he was introduced he understood why, for Miss Honeychurch,
disjoined from her music stool, was only a young lady with a quantity
of dark hair and a very pretty, pale, undeveloped face. She loved going
to concerts, she loved stopping with her cousin, she loved iced coffee
and meringues. He did not doubt that she loved his sermon also. But
before he left Tunbridge Wells he made a remark to the vicar, which he
now made to Lucy herself when she closed the little piano and moved
dreamily towards him:

“If Miss Honeychurch ever takes to live as she plays, it will be very
exciting both for us and for her.”

Lucy at once re-entered daily life.

“Oh, what a funny thing! Some one said just the same to mother, and she
said she trusted I should never live a duet.”

“Doesn’t Mrs. Honeychurch like music?”

“She doesn’t mind it. But she doesn’t like one to get excited over
anything; she thinks I am silly about it. She thinks—I can’t make out.
Once, you know, I said that I liked my own playing better than any
one’s. She has never got over it. Of course, I didn’t mean that I
played well; I only meant—”

“Of course,” said he, wondering why she bothered to explain.

“Music—” said Lucy, as if attempting some generality. She could not
complete it, and looked out absently upon Italy in the wet. The whole
life of the South was disorganized, and the most graceful nation in
Europe had turned into formless lumps of clothes.

The street and the river were dirty yellow, the bridge was dirty grey,
and the hills were dirty purple. Somewhere in their folds were
concealed Miss Lavish and Miss Bartlett, who had chosen this afternoon
to visit the Torre del Gallo.

“What about music?” said Mr. Beebe.

“Poor Charlotte will be sopped,” was Lucy’s reply.

The expedition was typical of Miss Bartlett, who would return cold,
tired, hungry, and angelic, with a ruined skirt, a pulpy Baedeker, and
a tickling cough in her throat. On another day, when the whole world
was singing and the air ran into the mouth, like wine, she would refuse
to stir from the drawing-room, saying that she was an old thing, and no
fit companion for a hearty girl.

“Miss Lavish has led your cousin astray. She hopes to find the true
Italy in the wet I believe.”

“Miss Lavish is so original,” murmured Lucy. This was a stock remark,
the supreme achievement of the Pension Bertolini in the way of
definition. Miss Lavish was so original. Mr. Beebe had his doubts, but
they would have been put down to clerical narrowness. For that, and for
other reasons, he held his peace.

“Is it true,” continued Lucy in awe-struck tone, “that Miss Lavish is
writing a book?”

“They do say so.”

“What is it about?”

“It will be a novel,” replied Mr. Beebe, “dealing with modern Italy.
Let me refer you for an account to Miss Catharine Alan, who uses words
herself more admirably than any one I know.”

“I wish Miss Lavish would tell me herself. We started such friends. But
I don’t think she ought to have run away with Baedeker that morning in
Santa Croce. Charlotte was most annoyed at finding me practically
alone, and so I couldn’t help being a little annoyed with Miss Lavish.”

“The two ladies, at all events, have made it up.”

He was interested in the sudden friendship between women so apparently
dissimilar as Miss Bartlett and Miss Lavish. They were always in each
other’s company, with Lucy a slighted third. Miss Lavish he believed he
understood, but Miss Bartlett might reveal unknown depths of
strangeness, though not perhaps, of meaning. Was Italy deflecting her
from the path of prim chaperon, which he had assigned to her at
Tunbridge Wells? All his life he had loved to study maiden ladies; they
were his specialty, and his profession had provided him with ample
opportunities for the work. Girls like Lucy were charming to look at,
but Mr. Beebe was, from rather profound reasons, somewhat chilly in his
attitude towards the other sex, and preferred to be interested rather
than enthralled.

Lucy, for the third time, said that poor Charlotte would be sopped. The
Arno was rising in flood, washing away the traces of the little carts
upon the foreshore. But in the south-west there had appeared a dull
haze of yellow, which might mean better weather if it did not mean
worse. She opened the window to inspect, and a cold blast entered the
room, drawing a plaintive cry from Miss Catharine Alan, who entered at
the same moment by the door.

“Oh, dear Miss Honeychurch, you will catch a chill! And Mr. Beebe here
besides. Who would suppose this is Italy? There is my sister actually
nursing the hot-water can; no comforts or proper provisions.”

She sidled towards them and sat down, self-conscious as she always was
on entering a room which contained one man, or a man and one woman.

“I could hear your beautiful playing, Miss Honeychurch, though I was in
my room with the door shut. Doors shut; indeed, most necessary. No one
has the least idea of privacy in this country. And one person catches
it from another.”

Lucy answered suitably. Mr. Beebe was not able to tell the ladies of
his adventure at Modena, where the chambermaid burst in upon him in his
bath, exclaiming cheerfully, “Fa niente, sono vecchia.” He contented
himself with saying: “I quite agree with you, Miss Alan. The Italians
are a most unpleasant people. They pry everywhere, they see everything,
and they know what we want before we know it ourselves. We are at their
mercy. They read our thoughts, they foretell our desires. From the
cab-driver down to—to Giotto, they turn us inside out, and I resent it.
Yet in their heart of hearts they are—how superficial! They have no
conception of the intellectual life. How right is Signora Bertolini,
who exclaimed to me the other day: ‘Ho, Mr. Beebe, if you knew what I
suffer over the children’s edjucaishion. _Hi_ won’t ’ave my little
Victorier taught by a hignorant Italian what can’t explain nothink!’”

Miss Alan did not follow, but gathered that she was being mocked in an
agreeable way. Her sister was a little disappointed in Mr. Beebe,
having expected better things from a clergyman whose head was bald and
who wore a pair of russet whiskers. Indeed, who would have supposed
that tolerance, sympathy, and a sense of humour would inhabit that
militant form?

In the midst of her satisfaction she continued to sidle, and at last
the cause was disclosed. From the chair beneath her she extracted a
gun-metal cigarette-case, on which were powdered in turquoise the
initials “E. L.”

“That belongs to Lavish.” said the clergyman. “A good fellow, Lavish,
but I wish she’d start a pipe.”

“Oh, Mr. Beebe,” said Miss Alan, divided between awe and mirth.
“Indeed, though it is dreadful for her to smoke, it is not quite as
dreadful as you suppose. She took to it, practically in despair, after
her life’s work was carried away in a landslip. Surely that makes it
more excusable.”

“What was that?” asked Lucy.

Mr. Beebe sat back complacently, and Miss Alan began as follows: “It
was a novel—and I am afraid, from what I can gather, not a very nice
novel. It is so sad when people who have abilities misuse them, and I
must say they nearly always do. Anyhow, she left it almost finished in
the Grotto of the Calvary at the Capuccini Hotel at Amalfi while she
went for a little ink. She said: ‘Can I have a little ink, please?’ But
you know what Italians are, and meanwhile the Grotto fell roaring on to
the beach, and the saddest thing of all is that she cannot remember
what she has written. The poor thing was very ill after it, and so got
tempted into cigarettes. It is a great secret, but I am glad to say
that she is writing another novel. She told Teresa and Miss Pole the
other day that she had got up all the local colour—this novel is to be
about modern Italy; the other was historical—but that she could not
start till she had an idea. First she tried Perugia for an inspiration,
then she came here—this must on no account get round. And so cheerful
through it all! I cannot help thinking that there is something to
admire in everyone, even if you do not approve of them.”

Miss Alan was always thus being charitable against her better
judgement. A delicate pathos perfumed her disconnected remarks, giving
them unexpected beauty, just as in the decaying autumn woods there
sometimes rise odours reminiscent of spring. She felt she had made
almost too many allowances, and apologized hurriedly for her
toleration.

“All the same, she is a little too—I hardly like to say unwomanly, but
she behaved most strangely when the Emersons arrived.”

Mr. Beebe smiled as Miss Alan plunged into an anecdote which he knew
she would be unable to finish in the presence of a gentleman.

“I don’t know, Miss Honeychurch, if you have noticed that Miss Pole,
the lady who has so much yellow hair, takes lemonade. That old Mr.
Emerson, who puts things very strangely—”

Her jaw dropped. She was silent. Mr. Beebe, whose social resources were
endless, went out to order some tea, and she continued to Lucy in a
hasty whisper:

“Stomach. He warned Miss Pole of her stomach-acidity, he called it—and
he may have meant to be kind. I must say I forgot myself and laughed;
it was so sudden. As Teresa truly said, it was no laughing matter. But
the point is that Miss Lavish was positively _attracted_ by his
mentioning S., and said she liked plain speaking, and meeting different
grades of thought. She thought they were commercial
travellers—‘drummers’ was the word she used—and all through dinner she
tried to prove that England, our great and beloved country, rests on
nothing but commerce. Teresa was very much annoyed, and left the table
before the cheese, saying as she did so: ‘There, Miss Lavish, is one
who can confute you better than I,’ and pointed to that beautiful
picture of Lord Tennyson. Then Miss Lavish said: ‘Tut! The early
Victorians.’ Just imagine! ‘Tut! The early Victorians.’ My sister had
gone, and I felt bound to speak. I said: ‘Miss Lavish, _I_ am an early
Victorian; at least, that is to say, I will hear no breath of censure
against our dear Queen.’ It was horrible speaking. I reminded her how
the Queen had been to Ireland when she did not want to go, and I must
say she was dumbfounded, and made no reply. But, unluckily, Mr. Emerson
overheard this part, and called in his deep voice: ‘Quite so, quite so!
I honour the woman for her Irish visit.’ The woman! I tell things so
badly; but you see what a tangle we were in by this time, all on
account of S. having been mentioned in the first place. But that was
not all. After dinner Miss Lavish actually came up and said: ‘Miss
Alan, I am going into the smoking-room to talk to those two nice men.
Come, too.’ Needless to say, I refused such an unsuitable invitation,
and she had the impertinence to tell me that it would broaden my ideas,
and said that she had four brothers, all University men, except one who
was in the army, who always made a point of talking to commercial
travellers.”

“Let me finish the story,” said Mr. Beebe, who had returned.

“Miss Lavish tried Miss Pole, myself, everyone, and finally said: ‘I
shall go alone.’ She went. At the end of five minutes she returned
unobtrusively with a green baize board, and began playing patience.”

“Whatever happened?” cried Lucy.

“No one knows. No one will ever know. Miss Lavish will never dare to
tell, and Mr. Emerson does not think it worth telling.”

“Mr. Beebe—old Mr. Emerson, is he nice or not nice? I do so want to
know.”

Mr. Beebe laughed and suggested that she should settle the question for
herself.

“No; but it is so difficult. Sometimes he is so silly, and then I do
not mind him. Miss Alan, what do you think? Is he nice?”

The little old lady shook her head, and sighed disapprovingly. Mr.
Beebe, whom the conversation amused, stirred her up by saying:

“I consider that you are bound to class him as nice, Miss Alan, after
that business of the violets.”

“Violets? Oh, dear! Who told you about the violets? How do things get
round? A pension is a bad place for gossips. No, I cannot forget how
they behaved at Mr. Eager’s lecture at Santa Croce. Oh, poor Miss
Honeychurch! It really was too bad. No, I have quite changed. I do
_not_ like the Emersons. They are _not_ nice.”

Mr. Beebe smiled nonchalantly. He had made a gentle effort to introduce
the Emersons into Bertolini society, and the effort had failed. He was
almost the only person who remained friendly to them. Miss Lavish, who
represented intellect, was avowedly hostile, and now the Miss Alans,
who stood for good breeding, were following her. Miss Bartlett,
smarting under an obligation, would scarcely be civil. The case of Lucy
was different. She had given him a hazy account of her adventures in
Santa Croce, and he gathered that the two men had made a curious and
possibly concerted attempt to annex her, to show her the world from
their own strange standpoint, to interest her in their private sorrows
and joys. This was impertinent; he did not wish their cause to be
championed by a young girl: he would rather it should fail. After all,
he knew nothing about them, and pension joys, pension sorrows, are
flimsy things; whereas Lucy would be his parishioner.

Lucy, with one eye upon the weather, finally said that she thought the
Emersons were nice; not that she saw anything of them now. Even their
seats at dinner had been moved.

“But aren’t they always waylaying you to go out with them, dear?” said
the little lady inquisitively.

“Only once. Charlotte didn’t like it, and said something—quite
politely, of course.”

“Most right of her. They don’t understand our ways. They must find
their level.”

Mr. Beebe rather felt that they had gone under. They had given up their
attempt—if it was one—to conquer society, and now the father was almost
as silent as the son. He wondered whether he would not plan a pleasant
day for these folk before they left—some expedition, perhaps, with Lucy
well chaperoned to be nice to them. It was one of Mr. Beebe’s chief
pleasures to provide people with happy memories.

Evening approached while they chatted; the air became brighter; the
colours on the trees and hills were purified, and the Arno lost its
muddy solidity and began to twinkle. There were a few streaks of
bluish-green among the clouds, a few patches of watery light upon the
earth, and then the dripping façade of San Miniato shone brilliantly in
the declining sun.

“Too late to go out,” said Miss Alan in a voice of relief. “All the
galleries are shut.”

“I think I shall go out,” said Lucy. “I want to go round the town in
the circular tram—on the platform by the driver.”

Her two companions looked grave. Mr. Beebe, who felt responsible for
her in the absence of Miss Bartlett, ventured to say:

“I wish we could. Unluckily I have letters. If you do want to go out
alone, won’t you be better on your feet?”

“Italians, dear, you know,” said Miss Alan.

“Perhaps I shall meet someone who reads me through and through!”

But they still looked disapproval, and she so far conceded to Mr. Beebe
as to say that she would only go for a little walk, and keep to the
street frequented by tourists.

“She oughtn’t really to go at all,” said Mr. Beebe, as they watched her
from the window, “and she knows it. I put it down to too much
Beethoven.”




Chapter IV
Fourth Chapter


Mr. Beebe was right. Lucy never knew her desires so clearly as after
music. She had not really appreciated the clergyman’s wit, nor the
suggestive twitterings of Miss Alan. Conversation was tedious; she
wanted something big, and she believed that it would have come to her
on the wind-swept platform of an electric tram. This she might not
attempt. It was unladylike. Why? Why were most big things unladylike?
Charlotte had once explained to her why. It was not that ladies were
inferior to men; it was that they were different. Their mission was to
inspire others to achievement rather than to achieve themselves.
Indirectly, by means of tact and a spotless name, a lady could
accomplish much. But if she rushed into the fray herself she would be
first censured, then despised, and finally ignored. Poems had been
written to illustrate this point.

There is much that is immortal in this medieval lady. The dragons have
gone, and so have the knights, but still she lingers in our midst. She
reigned in many an early Victorian castle, and was Queen of much early
Victorian song. It is sweet to protect her in the intervals of
business, sweet to pay her honour when she has cooked our dinner well.
But alas! the creature grows degenerate. In her heart also there are
springing up strange desires. She too is enamoured of heavy winds, and
vast panoramas, and green expanses of the sea. She has marked the
kingdom of this world, how full it is of wealth, and beauty, and war—a
radiant crust, built around the central fires, spinning towards the
receding heavens. Men, declaring that she inspires them to it, move
joyfully over the surface, having the most delightful meetings with
other men, happy, not because they are masculine, but because they are
alive. Before the show breaks up she would like to drop the august
title of the Eternal Woman, and go there as her transitory self.

Lucy does not stand for the medieval lady, who was rather an ideal to
which she was bidden to lift her eyes when feeling serious. Nor has she
any system of revolt. Here and there a restriction annoyed her
particularly, and she would transgress it, and perhaps be sorry that
she had done so. This afternoon she was peculiarly restive. She would
really like to do something of which her well-wishers disapproved. As
she might not go on the electric tram, she went to Alinari’s shop.

There she bought a photograph of Botticelli’s “Birth of Venus.” Venus,
being a pity, spoilt the picture, otherwise so charming, and Miss
Bartlett had persuaded her to do without it. (A pity in art of course
signified the nude.) Giorgione’s “Tempesta,” the “Idolino,” some of the
Sistine frescoes and the Apoxyomenos, were added to it. She felt a
little calmer then, and bought Fra Angelico’s “Coronation,” Giotto’s
“Ascension of St. John,” some Della Robbia babies, and some Guido Reni
Madonnas. For her taste was catholic, and she extended uncritical
approval to every well-known name.

But though she spent nearly seven lire, the gates of liberty seemed
still unopened. She was conscious of her discontent; it was new to her
to be conscious of it. “The world,” she thought, “is certainly full of
beautiful things, if only I could come across them.” It was not
surprising that Mrs. Honeychurch disapproved of music, declaring that
it always left her daughter peevish, unpractical, and touchy.

“Nothing ever happens to me,” she reflected, as she entered the Piazza
Signoria and looked nonchalantly at its marvels, now fairly familiar to
her. The great square was in shadow; the sunshine had come too late to
strike it. Neptune was already unsubstantial in the twilight, half god,
half ghost, and his fountain plashed dreamily to the men and satyrs who
idled together on its marge. The Loggia showed as the triple entrance
of a cave, wherein many a deity, shadowy, but immortal, looking forth
upon the arrivals and departures of mankind. It was the hour of
unreality—the hour, that is, when unfamiliar things are real. An older
person at such an hour and in such a place might think that sufficient
was happening to him, and rest content. Lucy desired more.

She fixed her eyes wistfully on the tower of the palace, which rose out
of the lower darkness like a pillar of roughened gold. It seemed no
longer a tower, no longer supported by earth, but some unattainable
treasure throbbing in the tranquil sky. Its brightness mesmerized her,
still dancing before her eyes when she bent them to the ground and
started towards home.

Then something did happen.

Two Italians by the Loggia had been bickering about a debt. “Cinque
lire,” they had cried, “cinque lire!” They sparred at each other, and
one of them was hit lightly upon the chest. He frowned; he bent towards
Lucy with a look of interest, as if he had an important message for
her. He opened his lips to deliver it, and a stream of red came out
between them and trickled down his unshaven chin.

That was all. A crowd rose out of the dusk. It hid this extraordinary
man from her, and bore him away to the fountain. Mr. George Emerson
happened to be a few paces away, looking at her across the spot where
the man had been. How very odd! Across something. Even as she caught
sight of him he grew dim; the palace itself grew dim, swayed above her,
fell on to her softly, slowly, noiselessly, and the sky fell with it.

She thought: “Oh, what have I done?”

“Oh, what have I done?” she murmured, and opened her eyes.

George Emerson still looked at her, but not across anything. She had
complained of dullness, and lo! one man was stabbed, and another held
her in his arms.

They were sitting on some steps in the Uffizi Arcade. He must have
carried her. He rose when she spoke, and began to dust his knees. She
repeated:

“Oh, what have I done?”

“You fainted.”

“I—I am very sorry.”

“How are you now?”

“Perfectly well—absolutely well.” And she began to nod and smile.

“Then let us come home. There’s no point in our stopping.”

He held out his hand to pull her up. She pretended not to see it. The
cries from the fountain—they had never ceased—rang emptily. The whole
world seemed pale and void of its original meaning.

“How very kind you have been! I might have hurt myself falling. But now
I am well. I can go alone, thank you.”

His hand was still extended.

“Oh, my photographs!” she exclaimed suddenly.

“What photographs?”

“I bought some photographs at Alinari’s. I must have dropped them out
there in the square.” She looked at him cautiously. “Would you add to
your kindness by fetching them?”

He added to his kindness. As soon as he had turned his back, Lucy arose
with the running of a maniac and stole down the arcade towards the
Arno.

“Miss Honeychurch!”

She stopped with her hand on her heart.

“You sit still; you aren’t fit to go home alone.”

“Yes, I am, thank you so very much.”

“No, you aren’t. You’d go openly if you were.”

“But I had rather—”

“Then I don’t fetch your photographs.”

“I had rather be alone.”

He said imperiously: “The man is dead—the man is probably dead; sit
down till you are rested.” She was bewildered, and obeyed him. “And
don’t move till I come back.”

In the distance she saw creatures with black hoods, such as appear in
dreams. The palace tower had lost the reflection of the declining day,
and joined itself to earth. How should she talk to Mr. Emerson when he
returned from the shadowy square? Again the thought occurred to her,
“Oh, what have I done?”—the thought that she, as well as the dying man,
had crossed some spiritual boundary.

He returned, and she talked of the murder. Oddly enough, it was an easy
topic. She spoke of the Italian character; she became almost garrulous
over the incident that had made her faint five minutes before. Being
strong physically, she soon overcame the horror of blood. She rose
without his assistance, and though wings seemed to flutter inside her,
she walked firmly enough towards the Arno. There a cabman signalled to
them; they refused him.

“And the murderer tried to kiss him, you say—how very odd Italians
are!—and gave himself up to the police! Mr. Beebe was saying that
Italians know everything, but I think they are rather childish. When my
cousin and I were at the Pitti yesterday—What was that?”

He had thrown something into the stream.

“What did you throw in?”

“Things I didn’t want,” he said crossly.

“Mr. Emerson!”

“Well?”

“Where are the photographs?”

He was silent.

“I believe it was my photographs that you threw away.”

“I didn’t know what to do with them,” he cried, and his voice was that
of an anxious boy. Her heart warmed towards him for the first time.
“They were covered with blood. There! I’m glad I’ve told you; and all
the time we were making conversation I was wondering what to do with
them.” He pointed down-stream. “They’ve gone.” The river swirled under
the bridge, “I did mind them so, and one is so foolish, it seemed
better that they should go out to the sea—I don’t know; I may just mean
that they frightened me.” Then the boy verged into a man. “For
something tremendous has happened; I must face it without getting
muddled. It isn’t exactly that a man has died.”

Something warned Lucy that she must stop him.

“It has happened,” he repeated, “and I mean to find out what it is.”

“Mr. Emerson—”

He turned towards her frowning, as if she had disturbed him in some
abstract quest.

“I want to ask you something before we go in.”

They were close to their pension. She stopped and leant her elbows
against the parapet of the embankment. He did likewise. There is at
times a magic in identity of position; it is one of the things that
have suggested to us eternal comradeship. She moved her elbows before
saying:

“I have behaved ridiculously.”

He was following his own thoughts.

“I was never so much ashamed of myself in my life; I cannot think what
came over me.”

“I nearly fainted myself,” he said; but she felt that her attitude
repelled him.

“Well, I owe you a thousand apologies.”

“Oh, all right.”

“And—this is the real point—you know how silly people are
gossiping—ladies especially, I am afraid—you understand what I mean?”

“I’m afraid I don’t.”

“I mean, would you not mention it to any one, my foolish behaviour?”

“Your behaviour? Oh, yes, all right—all right.”

“Thank you so much. And would you—”

She could not carry her request any further. The river was rushing
below them, almost black in the advancing night. He had thrown her
photographs into it, and then he had told her the reason. It struck her
that it was hopeless to look for chivalry in such a man. He would do
her no harm by idle gossip; he was trustworthy, intelligent, and even
kind; he might even have a high opinion of her. But he lacked chivalry;
his thoughts, like his behaviour, would not be modified by awe. It was
useless to say to him, “And would you—” and hope that he would complete
the sentence for himself, averting his eyes from her nakedness like the
knight in that beautiful picture. She had been in his arms, and he
remembered it, just as he remembered the blood on the photographs that
she had bought in Alinari’s shop. It was not exactly that a man had
died; something had happened to the living: they had come to a
situation where character tells, and where childhood enters upon the
branching paths of Youth.

“Well, thank you so much,” she repeated, “How quickly these accidents
do happen, and then one returns to the old life!”

“I don’t.”

Anxiety moved her to question him.

His answer was puzzling: “I shall probably want to live.”

“But why, Mr. Emerson? What do you mean?”

“I shall want to live, I say.”

Leaning her elbows on the parapet, she contemplated the River Arno,
whose roar was suggesting some unexpected melody to her ears.




Chapter V
Possibilities of a Pleasant Outing


It was a family saying that “you never knew which way Charlotte
Bartlett would turn.” She was perfectly pleasant and sensible over
Lucy’s adventure, found the abridged account of it quite adequate, and
paid suitable tribute to the courtesy of Mr. George Emerson. She and
Miss Lavish had had an adventure also. They had been stopped at the
Dazio coming back, and the young officials there, who seemed impudent
and _désœuvré_, had tried to search their reticules for provisions. It
might have been most unpleasant. Fortunately Miss Lavish was a match
for any one.

For good or for evil, Lucy was left to face her problem alone. None of
her friends had seen her, either in the Piazza or, later on, by the
embankment. Mr. Beebe, indeed, noticing her startled eyes at
dinner-time, had again passed to himself the remark of “Too much
Beethoven.” But he only supposed that she was ready for an adventure,
not that she had encountered it. This solitude oppressed her; she was
accustomed to have her thoughts confirmed by others or, at all events,
contradicted; it was too dreadful not to know whether she was thinking
right or wrong.

At breakfast next morning she took decisive action. There were two
plans between which she had to choose. Mr. Beebe was walking up to the
Torre del Gallo with the Emersons and some American ladies. Would Miss
Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch join the party? Charlotte declined for
herself; she had been there in the rain the previous afternoon. But she
thought it an admirable idea for Lucy, who hated shopping, changing
money, fetching letters, and other irksome duties—all of which Miss
Bartlett must accomplish this morning and could easily accomplish
alone.

“No, Charlotte!” cried the girl, with real warmth. “It’s very kind of
Mr. Beebe, but I am certainly coming with you. I had much rather.”

“Very well, dear,” said Miss Bartlett, with a faint flush of pleasure
that called forth a deep flush of shame on the cheeks of Lucy. How
abominably she behaved to Charlotte, now as always! But now she should
alter. All morning she would be really nice to her.

She slipped her arm into her cousin’s, and they started off along the
Lung’ Arno. The river was a lion that morning in strength, voice, and
colour. Miss Bartlett insisted on leaning over the parapet to look at
it. She then made her usual remark, which was “How I do wish Freddy and
your mother could see this, too!”

Lucy fidgeted; it was tiresome of Charlotte to have stopped exactly
where she did.

“Look, Lucia! Oh, you are watching for the Torre del Gallo party. I
feared you would repent you of your choice.”

Serious as the choice had been, Lucy did not repent. Yesterday had been
a muddle—queer and odd, the kind of thing one could not write down
easily on paper—but she had a feeling that Charlotte and her shopping
were preferable to George Emerson and the summit of the Torre del
Gallo. Since she could not unravel the tangle, she must take care not
to re-enter it. She could protest sincerely against Miss Bartlett’s
insinuations.

But though she had avoided the chief actor, the scenery unfortunately
remained. Charlotte, with the complacency of fate, led her from the
river to the Piazza Signoria. She could not have believed that stones,
a Loggia, a fountain, a palace tower, would have such significance. For
a moment she understood the nature of ghosts.

The exact site of the murder was occupied, not by a ghost, but by Miss
Lavish, who had the morning newspaper in her hand. She hailed them
briskly. The dreadful catastrophe of the previous day had given her an
idea which she thought would work up into a book.

“Oh, let me congratulate you!” said Miss Bartlett. “After your despair
of yesterday! What a fortunate thing!”

“Aha! Miss Honeychurch, come you here I am in luck. Now, you are to
tell me absolutely everything that you saw from the beginning.” Lucy
poked at the ground with her parasol.

“But perhaps you would rather not?”

“I’m sorry—if you could manage without it, I think I would rather not.”

The elder ladies exchanged glances, not of disapproval; it is suitable
that a girl should feel deeply.

“It is I who am sorry,” said Miss Lavish “literary hacks are shameless
creatures. I believe there’s no secret of the human heart into which we
wouldn’t pry.”

She marched cheerfully to the fountain and back, and did a few
calculations in realism. Then she said that she had been in the Piazza
since eight o’clock collecting material. A good deal of it was
unsuitable, but of course one always had to adapt. The two men had
quarrelled over a five-franc note. For the five-franc note she should
substitute a young lady, which would raise the tone of the tragedy, and
at the same time furnish an excellent plot.

“What is the heroine’s name?” asked Miss Bartlett.

“Leonora,” said Miss Lavish; her own name was Eleanor.

“I do hope she’s nice.”

That desideratum would not be omitted.

“And what is the plot?”

Love, murder, abduction, revenge, was the plot. But it all came while
the fountain plashed to the satyrs in the morning sun.

“I hope you will excuse me for boring on like this,” Miss Lavish
concluded. “It is so tempting to talk to really sympathetic people. Of
course, this is the barest outline. There will be a deal of local
colouring, descriptions of Florence and the neighbourhood, and I shall
also introduce some humorous characters. And let me give you all fair
warning: I intend to be unmerciful to the British tourist.”

“Oh, you wicked woman,” cried Miss Bartlett. “I am sure you are
thinking of the Emersons.”

Miss Lavish gave a Machiavellian smile.

“I confess that in Italy my sympathies are not with my own countrymen.
It is the neglected Italians who attract me, and whose lives I am going
to paint so far as I can. For I repeat and I insist, and I have always
held most strongly, that a tragedy such as yesterday’s is not the less
tragic because it happened in humble life.”

There was a fitting silence when Miss Lavish had concluded. Then the
cousins wished success to her labours, and walked slowly away across
the square.

“She is my idea of a really clever woman,” said Miss Bartlett. “That
last remark struck me as so particularly true. It should be a most
pathetic novel.”

Lucy assented. At present her great aim was not to get put into it. Her
perceptions this morning were curiously keen, and she believed that
Miss Lavish had her on trial for an _ingenué_.

“She is emancipated, but only in the very best sense of the word,”
continued Miss Bartlett slowly. “None but the superficial would be
shocked at her. We had a long talk yesterday. She believes in justice
and truth and human interest. She told me also that she has a high
opinion of the destiny of woman—Mr. Eager! Why, how nice! What a
pleasant surprise!”

“Ah, not for me,” said the chaplain blandly, “for I have been watching
you and Miss Honeychurch for quite a little time.”

“We were chatting to Miss Lavish.”

His brow contracted.

“So I saw. Were you indeed? Andate via! sono occupato!” The last remark
was made to a vender of panoramic photographs who was approaching with
a courteous smile. “I am about to venture a suggestion. Would you and
Miss Honeychurch be disposed to join me in a drive some day this week—a
drive in the hills? We might go up by Fiesole and back by Settignano.
There is a point on that road where we could get down and have an
hour’s ramble on the hillside. The view thence of Florence is most
beautiful—far better than the hackneyed view of Fiesole. It is the view
that Alessio Baldovinetti is fond of introducing into his pictures.
That man had a decided feeling for landscape. Decidedly. But who looks
at it to-day? Ah, the world is too much for us.”

Miss Bartlett had not heard of Alessio Baldovinetti, but she knew that
Mr. Eager was no commonplace chaplain. He was a member of the
residential colony who had made Florence their home. He knew the people
who never walked about with Baedekers, who had learnt to take a siesta
after lunch, who took drives the pension tourists had never heard of,
and saw by private influence galleries which were closed to them.
Living in delicate seclusion, some in furnished flats, others in
Renaissance villas on Fiesole’s slope, they read, wrote, studied, and
exchanged ideas, thus attaining to that intimate knowledge, or rather
perception, of Florence which is denied to all who carry in their
pockets the coupons of Cook.

Therefore an invitation from the chaplain was something to be proud of.
Between the two sections of his flock he was often the only link, and
it was his avowed custom to select those of his migratory sheep who
seemed worthy, and give them a few hours in the pastures of the
permanent. Tea at a Renaissance villa? Nothing had been said about it
yet. But if it did come to that—how Lucy would enjoy it!

A few days ago and Lucy would have felt the same. But the joys of life
were grouping themselves anew. A drive in the hills with Mr. Eager and
Miss Bartlett—even if culminating in a residential tea-party—was no
longer the greatest of them. She echoed the raptures of Charlotte
somewhat faintly. Only when she heard that Mr. Beebe was also coming
did her thanks become more sincere.

“So we shall be a _partie carrée_,” said the chaplain. “In these days
of toil and tumult one has great needs of the country and its message
of purity. Andate via! andate presto, presto! Ah, the town! Beautiful
as it is, it is the town.”

They assented.

“This very square—so I am told—witnessed yesterday the most sordid of
tragedies. To one who loves the Florence of Dante and Savonarola there
is something portentous in such desecration—portentous and
humiliating.”

“Humiliating indeed,” said Miss Bartlett. “Miss Honeychurch happened to
be passing through as it happened. She can hardly bear to speak of it.”
She glanced at Lucy proudly.

“And how came we to have you here?” asked the chaplain paternally.

Miss Bartlett’s recent liberalism oozed away at the question. “Do not
blame her, please, Mr. Eager. The fault is mine: I left her
unchaperoned.”

“So you were here alone, Miss Honeychurch?” His voice suggested
sympathetic reproof but at the same time indicated that a few harrowing
details would not be unacceptable. His dark, handsome face drooped
mournfully towards her to catch her reply.

“Practically.”

“One of our pension acquaintances kindly brought her home,” said Miss
Bartlett, adroitly concealing the sex of the preserver.

“For her also it must have been a terrible experience. I trust that
neither of you was at all—that it was not in your immediate proximity?”

Of the many things Lucy was noticing to-day, not the least remarkable
was this: the ghoulish fashion in which respectable people will nibble
after blood. George Emerson had kept the subject strangely pure.

“He died by the fountain, I believe,” was her reply.

“And you and your friend—”

“Were over at the Loggia.”

“That must have saved you much. You have not, of course, seen the
disgraceful illustrations which the gutter Press—This man is a public
nuisance; he knows that I am a resident perfectly well, and yet he goes
on worrying me to buy his vulgar views.”

Surely the vendor of photographs was in league with Lucy—in the eternal
league of Italy with youth. He had suddenly extended his book before
Miss Bartlett and Mr. Eager, binding their hands together by a long
glossy ribbon of churches, pictures, and views.

“This is too much!” cried the chaplain, striking petulantly at one of
Fra Angelico’s angels. She tore. A shrill cry rose from the vendor. The
book it seemed, was more valuable than one would have supposed.

“Willingly would I purchase—” began Miss Bartlett.

“Ignore him,” said Mr. Eager sharply, and they all walked rapidly away
from the square.

But an Italian can never be ignored, least of all when he has a
grievance. His mysterious persecution of Mr. Eager became relentless;
the air rang with his threats and lamentations. He appealed to Lucy;
would not she intercede? He was poor—he sheltered a family—the tax on
bread. He waited, he gibbered, he was recompensed, he was dissatisfied,
he did not leave them until he had swept their minds clean of all
thoughts whether pleasant or unpleasant.

Shopping was the topic that now ensued. Under the chaplain’s guidance
they selected many hideous presents and mementoes—florid little
picture-frames that seemed fashioned in gilded pastry; other little
frames, more severe, that stood on little easels, and were carven out
of oak; a blotting book of vellum; a Dante of the same material; cheap
mosaic brooches, which the maids, next Christmas, would never tell from
real; pins, pots, heraldic saucers, brown art-photographs; Eros and
Psyche in alabaster; St. Peter to match—all of which would have cost
less in London.

This successful morning left no pleasant impressions on Lucy. She had
been a little frightened, both by Miss Lavish and by Mr. Eager, she
knew not why. And as they frightened her, she had, strangely enough,
ceased to respect them. She doubted that Miss Lavish was a great
artist. She doubted that Mr. Eager was as full of spirituality and
culture as she had been led to suppose. They were tried by some new
test, and they were found wanting. As for Charlotte—as for Charlotte
she was exactly the same. It might be possible to be nice to her; it
was impossible to love her.

“The son of a labourer; I happen to know it for a fact. A mechanic of
some sort himself when he was young; then he took to writing for the
Socialistic Press. I came across him at Brixton.”

They were talking about the Emersons.

“How wonderfully people rise in these days!” sighed Miss Bartlett,
fingering a model of the leaning Tower of Pisa.

“Generally,” replied Mr. Eager, “one has only sympathy for their
success. The desire for education and for social advance—in these
things there is something not wholly vile. There are some working men
whom one would be very willing to see out here in Florence—little as
they would make of it.”

“Is he a journalist now?” Miss Bartlett asked.

“He is not; he made an advantageous marriage.”

He uttered this remark with a voice full of meaning, and ended with a
sigh.

“Oh, so he has a wife.”

“Dead, Miss Bartlett, dead. I wonder—yes I wonder how he has the
effrontery to look me in the face, to dare to claim acquaintance with
me. He was in my London parish long ago. The other day in Santa Croce,
when he was with Miss Honeychurch, I snubbed him. Let him beware that
he does not get more than a snub.”

“What?” cried Lucy, flushing.

“Exposure!” hissed Mr. Eager.

He tried to change the subject; but in scoring a dramatic point he had
interested his audience more than he had intended. Miss Bartlett was
full of very natural curiosity. Lucy, though she wished never to see
the Emersons again, was not disposed to condemn them on a single word.

“Do you mean,” she asked, “that he is an irreligious man? We know that
already.”

“Lucy, dear—” said Miss Bartlett, gently reproving her cousin’s
penetration.

“I should be astonished if you knew all. The boy—an innocent child at
the time—I will exclude. God knows what his education and his inherited
qualities may have made him.”

“Perhaps,” said Miss Bartlett, “it is something that we had better not
hear.”

“To speak plainly,” said Mr. Eager, “it is. I will say no more.” For
the first time Lucy’s rebellious thoughts swept out in words—for the
first time in her life.

“You have said very little.”

“It was my intention to say very little,” was his frigid reply.

He gazed indignantly at the girl, who met him with equal indignation.
She turned towards him from the shop counter; her breast heaved
quickly. He observed her brow, and the sudden strength of her lips. It
was intolerable that she should disbelieve him.

“Murder, if you want to know,” he cried angrily. “That man murdered his
wife!”

“How?” she retorted.

“To all intents and purposes he murdered her. That day in Santa
Croce—did they say anything against me?”

“Not a word, Mr. Eager—not a single word.”

“Oh, I thought they had been libelling me to you. But I suppose it is
only their personal charms that makes you defend them.”

“I’m not defending them,” said Lucy, losing her courage, and relapsing
into the old chaotic methods. “They’re nothing to me.”

“How could you think she was defending them?” said Miss Bartlett, much
discomfited by the unpleasant scene. The shopman was possibly
listening.

“She will find it difficult. For that man has murdered his wife in the
sight of God.”

The addition of God was striking. But the chaplain was really trying to
qualify a rash remark. A silence followed which might have been
impressive, but was merely awkward. Then Miss Bartlett hastily
purchased the Leaning Tower, and led the way into the street.

“I must be going,” said he, shutting his eyes and taking out his watch.

Miss Bartlett thanked him for his kindness, and spoke with enthusiasm
of the approaching drive.

“Drive? Oh, is our drive to come off?”

Lucy was recalled to her manners, and after a little exertion the
complacency of Mr. Eager was restored.

“Bother the drive!” exclaimed the girl, as soon as he had departed. “It
is just the drive we had arranged with Mr. Beebe without any fuss at
all. Why should he invite us in that absurd manner? We might as well
invite him. We are each paying for ourselves.”

Miss Bartlett, who had intended to lament over the Emersons, was
launched by this remark into unexpected thoughts.

“If that is so, dear—if the drive we and Mr. Beebe are going with Mr.
Eager is really the same as the one we are going with Mr. Beebe, then I
foresee a sad kettle of fish.”

“How?”

“Because Mr. Beebe has asked Eleanor Lavish to come, too.”

“That will mean another carriage.”

“Far worse. Mr. Eager does not like Eleanor. She knows it herself. The
truth must be told; she is too unconventional for him.”

They were now in the newspaper-room at the English bank. Lucy stood by
the central table, heedless of Punch and the Graphic, trying to answer,
or at all events to formulate the questions rioting in her brain. The
well-known world had broken up, and there emerged Florence, a magic
city where people thought and did the most extraordinary things.
Murder, accusations of murder, a lady clinging to one man and being
rude to another—were these the daily incidents of her streets? Was
there more in her frank beauty than met the eye—the power, perhaps, to
evoke passions, good and bad, and to bring them speedily to a
fulfillment?

Happy Charlotte, who, though greatly troubled over things that did not
matter, seemed oblivious to things that did; who could conjecture with
admirable delicacy “where things might lead to,” but apparently lost
sight of the goal as she approached it. Now she was crouching in the
corner trying to extract a circular note from a kind of linen nose-bag
which hung in chaste concealment round her neck. She had been told that
this was the only safe way to carry money in Italy; it must only be
broached within the walls of the English bank. As she groped she
murmured: “Whether it is Mr. Beebe who forgot to tell Mr. Eager, or Mr.
Eager who forgot when he told us, or whether they have decided to leave
Eleanor out altogether—which they could scarcely do—but in any case we
must be prepared. It is you they really want; I am only asked for
appearances. You shall go with the two gentlemen, and I and Eleanor
will follow behind. A one-horse carriage would do for us. Yet how
difficult it is!”

“It is indeed,” replied the girl, with a gravity that sounded
sympathetic.

“What do you think about it?” asked Miss Bartlett, flushed from the
struggle, and buttoning up her dress.

“I don’t know what I think, nor what I want.”

“Oh, dear, Lucy! I do hope Florence isn’t boring you. Speak the word,
and, as you know, I would take you to the ends of the earth to-morrow.”

“Thank you, Charlotte,” said Lucy, and pondered over the offer.

There were letters for her at the bureau—one from her brother, full of
athletics and biology; one from her mother, delightful as only her
mother’s letters could be. She had read in it of the crocuses which had
been bought for yellow and were coming up puce, of the new
parlour-maid, who had watered the ferns with essence of lemonade, of
the semi-detached cottages which were ruining Summer Street, and
breaking the heart of Sir Harry Otway. She recalled the free, pleasant
life of her home, where she was allowed to do everything, and where
nothing ever happened to her. The road up through the pine-woods, the
clean drawing-room, the view over the Sussex Weald—all hung before her
bright and distinct, but pathetic as the pictures in a gallery to
which, after much experience, a traveller returns.

“And the news?” asked Miss Bartlett.

“Mrs. Vyse and her son have gone to Rome,” said Lucy, giving the news
that interested her least. “Do you know the Vyses?”

“Oh, not that way back. We can never have too much of the dear Piazza
Signoria.”

“They’re nice people, the Vyses. So clever—my idea of what’s really
clever. Don’t you long to be in Rome?”

“I die for it!”

The Piazza Signoria is too stony to be brilliant. It has no grass, no
flowers, no frescoes, no glittering walls of marble or comforting
patches of ruddy brick. By an odd chance—unless we believe in a
presiding genius of places—the statues that relieve its severity
suggest, not the innocence of childhood, nor the glorious bewilderment
of youth, but the conscious achievements of maturity. Perseus and
Judith, Hercules and Thusnelda, they have done or suffered something,
and though they are immortal, immortality has come to them after
experience, not before. Here, not only in the solitude of Nature, might
a hero meet a goddess, or a heroine a god.

“Charlotte!” cried the girl suddenly. “Here’s an idea. What if we
popped off to Rome to-morrow—straight to the Vyses’ hotel? For I do
know what I want. I’m sick of Florence. No, you said you’d go to the
ends of the earth! Do! Do!”

Miss Bartlett, with equal vivacity, replied:

“Oh, you droll person! Pray, what would become of your drive in the
hills?”

They passed together through the gaunt beauty of the square, laughing
over the unpractical suggestion.




Chapter VI
The Reverend Arthur Beebe, the Reverend Cuthbert Eager, Mr. Emerson,
Mr. George Emerson, Miss Eleanor Lavish, Miss Charlotte Bartlett, and
Miss Lucy Honeychurch Drive Out in Carriages to See a View; Italians
Drive Them.


It was Phaethon who drove them to Fiesole that memorable day, a youth
all irresponsibility and fire, recklessly urging his master’s horses up
the stony hill. Mr. Beebe recognized him at once. Neither the Ages of
Faith nor the Age of Doubt had touched him; he was Phaethon in Tuscany
driving a cab. And it was Persephone whom he asked leave to pick up on
the way, saying that she was his sister—Persephone, tall and slender
and pale, returning with the Spring to her mother’s cottage, and still
shading her eyes from the unaccustomed light. To her Mr. Eager
objected, saying that here was the thin edge of the wedge, and one must
guard against imposition. But the ladies interceded, and when it had
been made clear that it was a very great favour, the goddess was
allowed to mount beside the god.

Phaethon at once slipped the left rein over her head, thus enabling
himself to drive with his arm round her waist. She did not mind. Mr.
Eager, who sat with his back to the horses, saw nothing of the
indecorous proceeding, and continued his conversation with Lucy. The
other two occupants of the carriage were old Mr. Emerson and Miss
Lavish. For a dreadful thing had happened: Mr. Beebe, without
consulting Mr. Eager, had doubled the size of the party. And though
Miss Bartlett and Miss Lavish had planned all the morning how the
people were to sit, at the critical moment when the carriages came
round they lost their heads, and Miss Lavish got in with Lucy, while
Miss Bartlett, with George Emerson and Mr. Beebe, followed on behind.

It was hard on the poor chaplain to have his _partie carrée_ thus
transformed. Tea at a Renaissance villa, if he had ever meditated it,
was now impossible. Lucy and Miss Bartlett had a certain style about
them, and Mr. Beebe, though unreliable, was a man of parts. But a
shoddy lady writer and a journalist who had murdered his wife in the
sight of God—they should enter no villa at his introduction.

Lucy, elegantly dressed in white, sat erect and nervous amid these
explosive ingredients, attentive to Mr. Eager, repressive towards Miss
Lavish, watchful of old Mr. Emerson, hitherto fortunately asleep,
thanks to a heavy lunch and the drowsy atmosphere of Spring. She looked
on the expedition as the work of Fate. But for it she would have
avoided George Emerson successfully. In an open manner he had shown
that he wished to continue their intimacy. She had refused, not because
she disliked him, but because she did not know what had happened, and
suspected that he did know. And this frightened her.

For the real event—whatever it was—had taken place, not in the Loggia,
but by the river. To behave wildly at the sight of death is pardonable.
But to discuss it afterwards, to pass from discussion into silence, and
through silence into sympathy, that is an error, not of a startled
emotion, but of the whole fabric. There was really something
blameworthy (she thought) in their joint contemplation of the shadowy
stream, in the common impulse which had turned them to the house
without the passing of a look or word. This sense of wickedness had
been slight at first. She had nearly joined the party to the Torre del
Gallo. But each time that she avoided George it became more imperative
that she should avoid him again. And now celestial irony, working
through her cousin and two clergymen, did not suffer her to leave
Florence till she had made this expedition with him through the hills.

Meanwhile Mr. Eager held her in civil converse; their little tiff was
over.

“So, Miss Honeychurch, you are travelling? As a student of art?”

“Oh, dear me, no—oh, no!”

“Perhaps as a student of human nature,” interposed Miss Lavish, “like
myself?”

“Oh, no. I am here as a tourist.”

“Oh, indeed,” said Mr. Eager. “Are you indeed? If you will not think me
rude, we residents sometimes pity you poor tourists not a little—handed
about like a parcel of goods from Venice to Florence, from Florence to
Rome, living herded together in pensions or hotels, quite unconscious
of anything that is outside Baedeker, their one anxiety to get ‘done’
or ‘through’ and go on somewhere else. The result is, they mix up
towns, rivers, palaces in one inextricable whirl. You know the American
girl in Punch who says: ‘Say, poppa, what did we see at Rome?’ And the
father replies: ‘Why, guess Rome was the place where we saw the yaller
dog.’ There’s travelling for you. Ha! ha! ha!”

“I quite agree,” said Miss Lavish, who had several times tried to
interrupt his mordant wit. “The narrowness and superficiality of the
Anglo-Saxon tourist is nothing less than a menace.”

“Quite so. Now, the English colony at Florence, Miss Honeychurch—and it
is of considerable size, though, of course, not all equally—a few are
here for trade, for example. But the greater part are students. Lady
Helen Laverstock is at present busy over Fra Angelico. I mention her
name because we are passing her villa on the left. No, you can only see
it if you stand—no, do not stand; you will fall. She is very proud of
that thick hedge. Inside, perfect seclusion. One might have gone back
six hundred years. Some critics believe that her garden was the scene
of The Decameron, which lends it an additional interest, does it not?”

“It does indeed!” cried Miss Lavish. “Tell me, where do they place the
scene of that wonderful seventh day?”

But Mr. Eager proceeded to tell Miss Honeychurch that on the right
lived Mr. Someone Something, an American of the best type—so rare!—and
that the Somebody Elses were farther down the hill. “Doubtless you know
her monographs in the series of ‘Mediæval Byways’? He is working at
Gemistus Pletho. Sometimes as I take tea in their beautiful grounds I
hear, over the wall, the electric tram squealing up the new road with
its loads of hot, dusty, unintelligent tourists who are going to ‘do’
Fiesole in an hour in order that they may say they have been there, and
I think—think—I think how little they think what lies so near them.”

During this speech the two figures on the box were sporting with each
other disgracefully. Lucy had a spasm of envy. Granted that they wished
to misbehave, it was pleasant for them to be able to do so. They were
probably the only people enjoying the expedition. The carriage swept
with agonizing jolts up through the Piazza of Fiesole and into the
Settignano road.

“Piano! piano!” said Mr. Eager, elegantly waving his hand over his
head.

“Va bene, signore, va bene, va bene,” crooned the driver, and whipped
his horses up again.

Now Mr. Eager and Miss Lavish began to talk against each other on the
subject of Alessio Baldovinetti. Was he a cause of the Renaissance, or
was he one of its manifestations? The other carriage was left behind.
As the pace increased to a gallop the large, slumbering form of Mr.
Emerson was thrown against the chaplain with the regularity of a
machine.

“Piano! piano!” said he, with a martyred look at Lucy.

An extra lurch made him turn angrily in his seat. Phaethon, who for
some time had been endeavouring to kiss Persephone, had just succeeded.

A little scene ensued, which, as Miss Bartlett said afterwards, was
most unpleasant. The horses were stopped, the lovers were ordered to
disentangle themselves, the boy was to lose his _pourboire_, the girl
was immediately to get down.

“She is my sister,” said he, turning round on them with piteous eyes.

Mr. Eager took the trouble to tell him that he was a liar.

Phaethon hung down his head, not at the matter of the accusation, but
at its manner. At this point Mr. Emerson, whom the shock of stopping
had awoke, declared that the lovers must on no account be separated,
and patted them on the back to signify his approval. And Miss Lavish,
though unwilling to ally him, felt bound to support the cause of
Bohemianism.

“Most certainly I would let them be,” she cried. “But I dare say I
shall receive scant support. I have always flown in the face of the
conventions all my life. This is what _I_ call an adventure.”

“We must not submit,” said Mr. Eager. “I knew he was trying it on. He
is treating us as if we were a party of Cook’s tourists.”

“Surely no!” said Miss Lavish, her ardour visibly decreasing.

The other carriage had drawn up behind, and sensible Mr. Beebe called
out that after this warning the couple would be sure to behave
themselves properly.

“Leave them alone,” Mr. Emerson begged the chaplain, of whom he stood
in no awe. “Do we find happiness so often that we should turn it off
the box when it happens to sit there? To be driven by lovers—A king
might envy us, and if we part them it’s more like sacrilege than
anything I know.”

Here the voice of Miss Bartlett was heard saying that a crowd had begun
to collect.

Mr. Eager, who suffered from an over-fluent tongue rather than a
resolute will, was determined to make himself heard. He addressed the
driver again. Italian in the mouth of Italians is a deep-voiced stream,
with unexpected cataracts and boulders to preserve it from monotony. In
Mr. Eager’s mouth it resembled nothing so much as an acid whistling
fountain which played ever higher and higher, and quicker and quicker,
and more and more shrilly, till abruptly it was turned off with a
click.

“Signorina!” said the man to Lucy, when the display had ceased. Why
should he appeal to Lucy?

“Signorina!” echoed Persephone in her glorious contralto. She pointed
at the other carriage. Why?

For a moment the two girls looked at each other. Then Persephone got
down from the box.

“Victory at last!” said Mr. Eager, smiting his hands together as the
carriages started again.

“It is not victory,” said Mr. Emerson. “It is defeat. You have parted
two people who were happy.”

Mr. Eager shut his eyes. He was obliged to sit next to Mr. Emerson, but
he would not speak to him. The old man was refreshed by sleep, and took
up the matter warmly. He commanded Lucy to agree with him; he shouted
for support to his son.

“We have tried to buy what cannot be bought with money. He has
bargained to drive us, and he is doing it. We have no rights over his
soul.”

Miss Lavish frowned. It is hard when a person you have classed as
typically British speaks out of his character.

“He was not driving us well,” she said. “He jolted us.”

“That I deny. It was as restful as sleeping. Aha! he is jolting us now.
Can you wonder? He would like to throw us out, and most certainly he is
justified. And if I were superstitious I’d be frightened of the girl,
too. It doesn’t do to injure young people. Have you ever heard of
Lorenzo de Medici?”

Miss Lavish bristled.

“Most certainly I have. Do you refer to Lorenzo il Magnifico, or to
Lorenzo, Duke of Urbino, or to Lorenzo surnamed Lorenzino on account of
his diminutive stature?”

“The Lord knows. Possibly he does know, for I refer to Lorenzo the
poet. He wrote a line—so I heard yesterday—which runs like this: ‘Don’t
go fighting against the Spring.’”

Mr. Eager could not resist the opportunity for erudition.

“Non fate guerra al Maggio,” he murmured. “‘War not with the May’ would
render a correct meaning.”

“The point is, we have warred with it. Look.” He pointed to the Val
d’Arno, which was visible far below them, through the budding trees.
“Fifty miles of Spring, and we’ve come up to admire them. Do you
suppose there’s any difference between Spring in nature and Spring in
man? But there we go, praising the one and condemning the other as
improper, ashamed that the same laws work eternally through both.”

No one encouraged him to talk. Presently Mr. Eager gave a signal for
the carriages to stop and marshalled the party for their ramble on the
hill. A hollow like a great amphitheatre, full of terraced steps and
misty olives, now lay between them and the heights of Fiesole, and the
road, still following its curve, was about to sweep on to a promontory
which stood out in the plain. It was this promontory, uncultivated,
wet, covered with bushes and occasional trees, which had caught the
fancy of Alessio Baldovinetti nearly five hundred years before. He had
ascended it, that diligent and rather obscure master, possibly with an
eye to business, possibly for the joy of ascending. Standing there, he
had seen that view of the Val d’Arno and distant Florence, which he
afterwards had introduced not very effectively into his work. But where
exactly had he stood? That was the question which Mr. Eager hoped to
solve now. And Miss Lavish, whose nature was attracted by anything
problematical, had become equally enthusiastic.

But it is not easy to carry the pictures of Alessio Baldovinetti in
your head, even if you have remembered to look at them before starting.
And the haze in the valley increased the difficulty of the quest.

The party sprang about from tuft to tuft of grass, their anxiety to
keep together being only equalled by their desire to go different
directions. Finally they split into groups. Lucy clung to Miss Bartlett
and Miss Lavish; the Emersons returned to hold laborious converse with
the drivers; while the two clergymen, who were expected to have topics
in common, were left to each other.

The two elder ladies soon threw off the mask. In the audible whisper
that was now so familiar to Lucy they began to discuss, not Alessio
Baldovinetti, but the drive. Miss Bartlett had asked Mr. George Emerson
what his profession was, and he had answered “the railway.” She was
very sorry that she had asked him. She had no idea that it would be
such a dreadful answer, or she would not have asked him. Mr. Beebe had
turned the conversation so cleverly, and she hoped that the young man
was not very much hurt at her asking him.

“The railway!” gasped Miss Lavish. “Oh, but I shall die! Of course it
was the railway!” She could not control her mirth. “He is the image of
a porter—on, on the South-Eastern.”

“Eleanor, be quiet,” plucking at her vivacious companion. “Hush!
They’ll hear—the Emersons—”

“I can’t stop. Let me go my wicked way. A porter—”

“Eleanor!”

“I’m sure it’s all right,” put in Lucy. “The Emersons won’t hear, and
they wouldn’t mind if they did.”

Miss Lavish did not seem pleased at this.

“Miss Honeychurch listening!” she said rather crossly. “Pouf! Wouf! You
naughty girl! Go away!”

“Oh, Lucy, you ought to be with Mr. Eager, I’m sure.”

“I can’t find them now, and I don’t want to either.”

“Mr. Eager will be offended. It is your party.”

“Please, I’d rather stop here with you.”

“No, I agree,” said Miss Lavish. “It’s like a school feast; the boys
have got separated from the girls. Miss Lucy, you are to go. We wish to
converse on high topics unsuited for your ear.”

The girl was stubborn. As her time at Florence drew to its close she
was only at ease amongst those to whom she felt indifferent. Such a one
was Miss Lavish, and such for the moment was Charlotte. She wished she
had not called attention to herself; they were both annoyed at her
remark and seemed determined to get rid of her.

“How tired one gets,” said Miss Bartlett. “Oh, I do wish Freddy and
your mother could be here.”

Unselfishness with Miss Bartlett had entirely usurped the functions of
enthusiasm. Lucy did not look at the view either. She would not enjoy
anything till she was safe at Rome.

“Then sit you down,” said Miss Lavish. “Observe my foresight.”

With many a smile she produced two of those mackintosh squares that
protect the frame of the tourist from damp grass or cold marble steps.
She sat on one; who was to sit on the other?

“Lucy; without a moment’s doubt, Lucy. The ground will do for me.
Really I have not had rheumatism for years. If I do feel it coming on I
shall stand. Imagine your mother’s feelings if I let you sit in the wet
in your white linen.” She sat down heavily where the ground looked
particularly moist. “Here we are, all settled delightfully. Even if my
dress is thinner it will not show so much, being brown. Sit down, dear;
you are too unselfish; you don’t assert yourself enough.” She cleared
her throat. “Now don’t be alarmed; this isn’t a cold. It’s the tiniest
cough, and I have had it three days. It’s nothing to do with sitting
here at all.”

There was only one way of treating the situation. At the end of five
minutes Lucy departed in search of Mr. Beebe and Mr. Eager, vanquished
by the mackintosh square.

She addressed herself to the drivers, who were sprawling in the
carriages, perfuming the cushions with cigars. The miscreant, a bony
young man scorched black by the sun, rose to greet her with the
courtesy of a host and the assurance of a relative.

“Dove?” said Lucy, after much anxious thought.

His face lit up. Of course he knew where. Not so far either. His arm
swept three-fourths of the horizon. He should just think he did know
where. He pressed his finger-tips to his forehead and then pushed them
towards her, as if oozing with visible extract of knowledge.

More seemed necessary. What was the Italian for “clergyman”?

“Dove buoni uomini?” said she at last.

Good? Scarcely the adjective for those noble beings! He showed her his
cigar.

“Uno—piu—piccolo,” was her next remark, implying “Has the cigar been
given to you by Mr. Beebe, the smaller of the two good men?”

She was correct as usual. He tied the horse to a tree, kicked it to
make it stay quiet, dusted the carriage, arranged his hair, remoulded
his hat, encouraged his moustache, and in rather less than a quarter of
a minute was ready to conduct her. Italians are born knowing the way.
It would seem that the whole earth lay before them, not as a map, but
as a chess-board, whereon they continually behold the changing pieces
as well as the squares. Any one can find places, but the finding of
people is a gift from God.

He only stopped once, to pick her some great blue violets. She thanked
him with real pleasure. In the company of this common man the world was
beautiful and direct. For the first time she felt the influence of
Spring. His arm swept the horizon gracefully; violets, like other
things, existed in great profusion there; “would she like to see them?”

“Ma buoni uomini.”

He bowed. Certainly. Good men first, violets afterwards. They proceeded
briskly through the undergrowth, which became thicker and thicker. They
were nearing the edge of the promontory, and the view was stealing
round them, but the brown network of the bushes shattered it into
countless pieces. He was occupied in his cigar, and in holding back the
pliant boughs. She was rejoicing in her escape from dullness. Not a
step, not a twig, was unimportant to her.

“What is that?”

There was a voice in the wood, in the distance behind them. The voice
of Mr. Eager? He shrugged his shoulders. An Italian’s ignorance is
sometimes more remarkable than his knowledge. She could not make him
understand that perhaps they had missed the clergymen. The view was
forming at last; she could discern the river, the golden plain, other
hills.

“Eccolo!” he exclaimed.

At the same moment the ground gave way, and with a cry she fell out of
the wood. Light and beauty enveloped her. She had fallen on to a little
open terrace, which was covered with violets from end to end.

“Courage!” cried her companion, now standing some six feet above.
“Courage and love.”

She did not answer. From her feet the ground sloped sharply into view,
and violets ran down in rivulets and streams and cataracts, irrigating
the hillside with blue, eddying round the tree stems collecting into
pools in the hollows, covering the grass with spots of azure foam. But
never again were they in such profusion; this terrace was the
well-head, the primal source whence beauty gushed out to water the
earth.

Standing at its brink, like a swimmer who prepares, was the good man.
But he was not the good man that she had expected, and he was alone.

George had turned at the sound of her arrival. For a moment he
contemplated her, as one who had fallen out of heaven. He saw radiant
joy in her face, he saw the flowers beat against her dress in blue
waves. The bushes above them closed. He stepped quickly forward and
kissed her.

Before she could speak, almost before she could feel, a voice called,
“Lucy! Lucy! Lucy!” The silence of life had been broken by Miss
Bartlett who stood brown against the view.




Chapter VII
They Return


Some complicated game had been playing up and down the hillside all the
afternoon. What it was and exactly how the players had sided, Lucy was
slow to discover. Mr. Eager had met them with a questioning eye.
Charlotte had repulsed him with much small talk. Mr. Emerson, seeking
his son, was told whereabouts to find him. Mr. Beebe, who wore the
heated aspect of a neutral, was bidden to collect the factions for the
return home. There was a general sense of groping and bewilderment. Pan
had been amongst them—not the great god Pan, who has been buried these
two thousand years, but the little god Pan, who presides over social
contretemps and unsuccessful picnics. Mr. Beebe had lost everyone, and
had consumed in solitude the tea-basket which he had brought up as a
pleasant surprise. Miss Lavish had lost Miss Bartlett. Lucy had lost
Mr. Eager. Mr. Emerson had lost George. Miss Bartlett had lost a
mackintosh square. Phaethon had lost the game.

That last fact was undeniable. He climbed on to the box shivering, with
his collar up, prophesying the swift approach of bad weather. “Let us
go immediately,” he told them. “The signorino will walk.”

“All the way? He will be hours,” said Mr. Beebe.

“Apparently. I told him it was unwise.” He would look no one in the
face; perhaps defeat was particularly mortifying for him. He alone had
played skilfully, using the whole of his instinct, while the others had
used scraps of their intelligence. He alone had divined what things
were, and what he wished them to be. He alone had interpreted the
message that Lucy had received five days before from the lips of a
dying man. Persephone, who spends half her life in the grave—she could
interpret it also. Not so these English. They gain knowledge slowly,
and perhaps too late.

The thoughts of a cab-driver, however just, seldom affect the lives of
his employers. He was the most competent of Miss Bartlett’s opponents,
but infinitely the least dangerous. Once back in the town, he and his
insight and his knowledge would trouble English ladies no more. Of
course, it was most unpleasant; she had seen his black head in the
bushes; he might make a tavern story out of it. But after all, what
have we to do with taverns? Real menace belongs to the drawing-room. It
was of drawing-room people that Miss Bartlett thought as she journeyed
downwards towards the fading sun. Lucy sat beside her; Mr. Eager sat
opposite, trying to catch her eye; he was vaguely suspicious. They
spoke of Alessio Baldovinetti.

Rain and darkness came on together. The two ladies huddled together
under an inadequate parasol. There was a lightning flash, and Miss
Lavish who was nervous, screamed from the carriage in front. At the
next flash, Lucy screamed also. Mr. Eager addressed her professionally:

“Courage, Miss Honeychurch, courage and faith. If I might say so, there
is something almost blasphemous in this horror of the elements. Are we
seriously to suppose that all these clouds, all this immense electrical
display, is simply called into existence to extinguish you or me?”

“No—of course—”

“Even from the scientific standpoint the chances against our being
struck are enormous. The steel knives, the only articles which might
attract the current, are in the other carriage. And, in any case, we
are infinitely safer than if we were walking. Courage—courage and
faith.”

Under the rug, Lucy felt the kindly pressure of her cousin’s hand. At
times our need for a sympathetic gesture is so great that we care not
what exactly it signifies or how much we may have to pay for it
afterwards. Miss Bartlett, by this timely exercise of her muscles,
gained more than she would have got in hours of preaching or cross
examination.

She renewed it when the two carriages stopped, half into Florence.

“Mr. Eager!” called Mr. Beebe. “We want your assistance. Will you
interpret for us?”

“George!” cried Mr. Emerson. “Ask your driver which way George went.
The boy may lose his way. He may be killed.”

“Go, Mr. Eager,” said Miss Bartlett, “don’t ask our driver; our driver
is no help. Go and support poor Mr. Beebe—, he is nearly demented.”

“He may be killed!” cried the old man. “He may be killed!”

“Typical behaviour,” said the chaplain, as he quitted the carriage. “In
the presence of reality that kind of person invariably breaks down.”

“What does he know?” whispered Lucy as soon as they were alone.
“Charlotte, how much does Mr. Eager know?”

“Nothing, dearest; he knows nothing. But—” she pointed at the
driver—“_he_ knows everything. Dearest, had we better? Shall I?” She
took out her purse. “It is dreadful to be entangled with low-class
people. He saw it all.” Tapping Phaethon’s back with her guide-book,
she said, “Silenzio!” and offered him a franc.

“Va bene,” he replied, and accepted it. As well this ending to his day
as any. But Lucy, a mortal maid, was disappointed in him.

There was an explosion up the road. The storm had struck the overhead
wire of the tramline, and one of the great supports had fallen. If they
had not stopped perhaps they might have been hurt. They chose to regard
it as a miraculous preservation, and the floods of love and sincerity,
which fructify every hour of life, burst forth in tumult. They
descended from the carriages; they embraced each other. It was as
joyful to be forgiven past unworthinesses as to forgive them. For a
moment they realized vast possibilities of good.

The older people recovered quickly. In the very height of their emotion
they knew it to be unmanly or unladylike. Miss Lavish calculated that,
even if they had continued, they would not have been caught in the
accident. Mr. Eager mumbled a temperate prayer. But the drivers,
through miles of dark squalid road, poured out their souls to the
dryads and the saints, and Lucy poured out hers to her cousin.

“Charlotte, dear Charlotte, kiss me. Kiss me again. Only you can
understand me. You warned me to be careful. And I—I thought I was
developing.”

“Do not cry, dearest. Take your time.”

“I have been obstinate and silly—worse than you know, far worse. Once
by the river—Oh, but he isn’t killed—he wouldn’t be killed, would he?”

The thought disturbed her repentance. As a matter of fact, the storm
was worst along the road; but she had been near danger, and so she
thought it must be near to everyone.

“I trust not. One would always pray against that.”

“He is really—I think he was taken by surprise, just as I was before.
But this time I’m not to blame; I want you to believe that. I simply
slipped into those violets. No, I want to be really truthful. I am a
little to blame. I had silly thoughts. The sky, you know, was gold, and
the ground all blue, and for a moment he looked like someone in a
book.”

“In a book?”

“Heroes—gods—the nonsense of schoolgirls.”

“And then?”

“But, Charlotte, you know what happened then.”

Miss Bartlett was silent. Indeed, she had little more to learn. With a
certain amount of insight she drew her young cousin affectionately to
her. All the way back Lucy’s body was shaken by deep sighs, which
nothing could repress.

“I want to be truthful,” she whispered. “It is so hard to be absolutely
truthful.”

“Don’t be troubled, dearest. Wait till you are calmer. We will talk it
over before bed-time in my room.”

So they re-entered the city with hands clasped. It was a shock to the
girl to find how far emotion had ebbed in others. The storm had ceased,
and Mr. Emerson was easier about his son. Mr. Beebe had regained good
humour, and Mr. Eager was already snubbing Miss Lavish. Charlotte alone
she was sure of—Charlotte, whose exterior concealed so much insight and
love.

The luxury of self-exposure kept her almost happy through the long
evening. She thought not so much of what had happened as of how she
should describe it. All her sensations, her spasms of courage, her
moments of unreasonable joy, her mysterious discontent, should be
carefully laid before her cousin. And together in divine confidence
they would disentangle and interpret them all.

“At last,” thought she, “I shall understand myself. I shan’t again be
troubled by things that come out of nothing, and mean I don’t know
what.”

Miss Alan asked her to play. She refused vehemently. Music seemed to
her the employment of a child. She sat close to her cousin, who, with
commendable patience, was listening to a long story about lost luggage.
When it was over she capped it by a story of her own. Lucy became
rather hysterical with the delay. In vain she tried to check, or at all
events to accelerate, the tale. It was not till a late hour that Miss
Bartlett had recovered her luggage and could say in her usual tone of
gentle reproach:

“Well, dear, I at all events am ready for Bedfordshire. Come into my
room, and I will give a good brush to your hair.”

With some solemnity the door was shut, and a cane chair placed for the
girl. Then Miss Bartlett said “So what is to be done?”

She was unprepared for the question. It had not occurred to her that
she would have to do anything. A detailed exhibition of her emotions
was all that she had counted upon.

“What is to be done? A point, dearest, which you alone can settle.”

The rain was streaming down the black windows, and the great room felt
damp and chilly, One candle burnt trembling on the chest of drawers
close to Miss Bartlett’s toque, which cast monstrous and fantastic
shadows on the bolted door. A tram roared by in the dark, and Lucy felt
unaccountably sad, though she had long since dried her eyes. She lifted
them to the ceiling, where the griffins and bassoons were colourless
and vague, the very ghosts of joy.

“It has been raining for nearly four hours,” she said at last.

Miss Bartlett ignored the remark.

“How do you propose to silence him?”

“The driver?”

“My dear girl, no; Mr. George Emerson.”

Lucy began to pace up and down the room.

“I don’t understand,” she said at last.

She understood very well, but she no longer wished to be absolutely
truthful.

“How are you going to stop him talking about it?”

“I have a feeling that talk is a thing he will never do.”

“I, too, intend to judge him charitably. But unfortunately I have met
the type before. They seldom keep their exploits to themselves.”

“Exploits?” cried Lucy, wincing under the horrible plural.

“My poor dear, did you suppose that this was his first? Come here and
listen to me. I am only gathering it from his own remarks. Do you
remember that day at lunch when he argued with Miss Alan that liking
one person is an extra reason for liking another?”

“Yes,” said Lucy, whom at the time the argument had pleased.

“Well, I am no prude. There is no need to call him a wicked young man,
but obviously he is thoroughly unrefined. Let us put it down to his
deplorable antecedents and education, if you wish. But we are no
farther on with our question. What do you propose to do?”

An idea rushed across Lucy’s brain, which, had she thought of it sooner
and made it part of her, might have proved victorious.

“I propose to speak to him,” said she.

Miss Bartlett uttered a cry of genuine alarm.

“You see, Charlotte, your kindness—I shall never forget it. But—as you
said—it is my affair. Mine and his.”

“And you are going to _implore_ him, to _beg_ him to keep silence?”

“Certainly not. There would be no difficulty. Whatever you ask him he
answers, yes or no; then it is over. I have been frightened of him. But
now I am not one little bit.”

“But we fear him for you, dear. You are so young and inexperienced, you
have lived among such nice people, that you cannot realize what men can
be—how they can take a brutal pleasure in insulting a woman whom her
sex does not protect and rally round. This afternoon, for example, if I
had not arrived, what would have happened?”

“I can’t think,” said Lucy gravely.

Something in her voice made Miss Bartlett repeat her question, intoning
it more vigorously.

“What would have happened if I hadn’t arrived?”

“I can’t think,” said Lucy again.

“When he insulted you, how would you have replied?”

“I hadn’t time to think. You came.”

“Yes, but won’t you tell me now what you would have done?”

“I should have—” She checked herself, and broke the sentence off. She
went up to the dripping window and strained her eyes into the darkness.
She could not think what she would have done.

“Come away from the window, dear,” said Miss Bartlett. “You will be
seen from the road.”

Lucy obeyed. She was in her cousin’s power. She could not modulate out
the key of self-abasement in which she had started. Neither of them
referred again to her suggestion that she should speak to George and
settle the matter, whatever it was, with him.

Miss Bartlett became plaintive.

“Oh, for a real man! We are only two women, you and I. Mr. Beebe is
hopeless. There is Mr. Eager, but you do not trust him. Oh, for your
brother! He is young, but I know that his sister’s insult would rouse
in him a very lion. Thank God, chivalry is not yet dead. There are
still left some men who can reverence woman.”

As she spoke, she pulled off her rings, of which she wore several, and
ranged them upon the pin cushion. Then she blew into her gloves and
said:

“It will be a push to catch the morning train, but we must try.”

“What train?”

“The train to Rome.” She looked at her gloves critically.

The girl received the announcement as easily as it had been given.

“When does the train to Rome go?”

“At eight.”

“Signora Bertolini would be upset.”

“We must face that,” said Miss Bartlett, not liking to say that she had
given notice already.

“She will make us pay for a whole week’s pension.”

“I expect she will. However, we shall be much more comfortable at the
Vyses’ hotel. Isn’t afternoon tea given there for nothing?”

“Yes, but they pay extra for wine.” After this remark she remained
motionless and silent. To her tired eyes Charlotte throbbed and swelled
like a ghostly figure in a dream.

They began to sort their clothes for packing, for there was no time to
lose, if they were to catch the train to Rome. Lucy, when admonished,
began to move to and fro between the rooms, more conscious of the
discomforts of packing by candlelight than of a subtler ill. Charlotte,
who was practical without ability, knelt by the side of an empty trunk,
vainly endeavouring to pave it with books of varying thickness and
size. She gave two or three sighs, for the stooping posture hurt her
back, and, for all her diplomacy, she felt that she was growing old.
The girl heard her as she entered the room, and was seized with one of
those emotional impulses to which she could never attribute a cause.
She only felt that the candle would burn better, the packing go easier,
the world be happier, if she could give and receive some human love.
The impulse had come before to-day, but never so strongly. She knelt
down by her cousin’s side and took her in her arms.

Miss Bartlett returned the embrace with tenderness and warmth. But she
was not a stupid woman, and she knew perfectly well that Lucy did not
love her, but needed her to love. For it was in ominous tones that she
said, after a long pause:

“Dearest Lucy, how will you ever forgive me?”

Lucy was on her guard at once, knowing by bitter experience what
forgiving Miss Bartlett meant. Her emotion relaxed, she modified her
embrace a little, and she said:

“Charlotte dear, what do you mean? As if I have anything to forgive!”

“You have a great deal, and I have a very great deal to forgive myself,
too. I know well how much I vex you at every turn.”

“But no—”

Miss Bartlett assumed her favourite role, that of the prematurely aged
martyr.

“Ah, but yes! I feel that our tour together is hardly the success I had
hoped. I might have known it would not do. You want someone younger and
stronger and more in sympathy with you. I am too uninteresting and
old-fashioned—only fit to pack and unpack your things.”

“Please—”

“My only consolation was that you found people more to your taste, and
were often able to leave me at home. I had my own poor ideas of what a
lady ought to do, but I hope I did not inflict them on you more than
was necessary. You had your own way about these rooms, at all events.”

“You mustn’t say these things,” said Lucy softly.

She still clung to the hope that she and Charlotte loved each other,
heart and soul. They continued to pack in silence.

“I have been a failure,” said Miss Bartlett, as she struggled with the
straps of Lucy’s trunk instead of strapping her own. “Failed to make
you happy; failed in my duty to your mother. She has been so generous
to me; I shall never face her again after this disaster.”

“But mother will understand. It is not your fault, this trouble, and it
isn’t a disaster either.”

“It is my fault, it is a disaster. She will never forgive me, and
rightly. For instance, what right had I to make friends with Miss
Lavish?”

“Every right.”

“When I was here for your sake? If I have vexed you it is equally true
that I have neglected you. Your mother will see this as clearly as I
do, when you tell her.”

Lucy, from a cowardly wish to improve the situation, said:

“Why need mother hear of it?”

“But you tell her everything?”

“I suppose I do generally.”

“I dare not break your confidence. There is something sacred in it.
Unless you feel that it is a thing you could not tell her.”

The girl would not be degraded to this.

“Naturally I should have told her. But in case she should blame you in
any way, I promise I will not, I am very willing not to. I will never
speak of it either to her or to any one.”

Her promise brought the long-drawn interview to a sudden close. Miss
Bartlett pecked her smartly on both cheeks, wished her good-night, and
sent her to her own room.

For a moment the original trouble was in the background. George would
seem to have behaved like a cad throughout; perhaps that was the view
which one would take eventually. At present she neither acquitted nor
condemned him; she did not pass judgement. At the moment when she was
about to judge him her cousin’s voice had intervened, and, ever since,
it was Miss Bartlett who had dominated; Miss Bartlett who, even now,
could be heard sighing into a crack in the partition wall; Miss
Bartlett, who had really been neither pliable nor humble nor
inconsistent. She had worked like a great artist; for a time—indeed,
for years—she had been meaningless, but at the end there was presented
to the girl the complete picture of a cheerless, loveless world in
which the young rush to destruction until they learn better—a
shamefaced world of precautions and barriers which may avert evil, but
which do not seem to bring good, if we may judge from those who have
used them most.

Lucy was suffering from the most grievous wrong which this world has
yet discovered: diplomatic advantage had been taken of her sincerity,
of her craving for sympathy and love. Such a wrong is not easily
forgotten. Never again did she expose herself without due consideration
and precaution against rebuff. And such a wrong may react disastrously
upon the soul.

The door-bell rang, and she started to the shutters. Before she reached
them she hesitated, turned, and blew out the candle. Thus it was that,
though she saw someone standing in the wet below, he, though he looked
up, did not see her.

To reach his room he had to go by hers. She was still dressed. It
struck her that she might slip into the passage and just say that she
would be gone before he was up, and that their extraordinary
intercourse was over.

Whether she would have dared to do this was never proved. At the
critical moment Miss Bartlett opened her own door, and her voice said:

“I wish one word with you in the drawing-room, Mr. Emerson, please.”

Soon their footsteps returned, and Miss Bartlett said: “Good-night, Mr.
Emerson.”

His heavy, tired breathing was the only reply; the chaperon had done
her work.

Lucy cried aloud: “It isn’t true. It can’t all be true. I want not to
be muddled. I want to grow older quickly.”

Miss Bartlett tapped on the wall.

“Go to bed at once, dear. You need all the rest you can get.”

In the morning they left for Rome.




PART TWO




Chapter VIII
Medieval


The drawing-room curtains at Windy Corner had been pulled to meet, for
the carpet was new and deserved protection from the August sun. They
were heavy curtains, reaching almost to the ground, and the light that
filtered through them was subdued and varied. A poet—none was
present—might have quoted, “Life like a dome of many coloured glass,”
or might have compared the curtains to sluice-gates, lowered against
the intolerable tides of heaven. Without was poured a sea of radiance;
within, the glory, though visible, was tempered to the capacities of
man.

Two pleasant people sat in the room. One—a boy of nineteen—was studying
a small manual of anatomy, and peering occasionally at a bone which lay
upon the piano. From time to time he bounced in his chair and puffed
and groaned, for the day was hot and the print small, and the human
frame fearfully made; and his mother, who was writing a letter, did
continually read out to him what she had written. And continually did
she rise from her seat and part the curtains so that a rivulet of light
fell across the carpet, and make the remark that they were still there.

“Where aren’t they?” said the boy, who was Freddy, Lucy’s brother. “I
tell you I’m getting fairly sick.”

“For goodness’ sake go out of my drawing-room, then?” cried Mrs.
Honeychurch, who hoped to cure her children of slang by taking it
literally.

Freddy did not move or reply.

“I think things are coming to a head,” she observed, rather wanting her
son’s opinion on the situation if she could obtain it without undue
supplication.

“Time they did.”

“I am glad that Cecil is asking her this once more.”

“It’s his third go, isn’t it?”

“Freddy I do call the way you talk unkind.”

“I didn’t mean to be unkind.” Then he added: “But I do think Lucy might
have got this off her chest in Italy. I don’t know how girls manage
things, but she can’t have said ‘No’ properly before, or she wouldn’t
have to say it again now. Over the whole thing—I can’t explain—I do
feel so uncomfortable.”

“Do you indeed, dear? How interesting!”

“I feel—never mind.”

He returned to his work.

“Just listen to what I have written to Mrs. Vyse. I said: ‘Dear Mrs.
Vyse.’”

“Yes, mother, you told me. A jolly good letter.”

“I said: ‘Dear Mrs. Vyse, Cecil has just asked my permission about it,
and I should be delighted, if Lucy wishes it. But—’” She stopped
reading, “I was rather amused at Cecil asking my permission at all. He
has always gone in for unconventionality, and parents nowhere, and so
forth. When it comes to the point, he can’t get on without me.”

“Nor me.”

“You?”

Freddy nodded.

“What do you mean?”

“He asked me for my permission also.”

She exclaimed: “How very odd of him!”

“Why so?” asked the son and heir. “Why shouldn’t my permission be
asked?”

“What do you know about Lucy or girls or anything? What ever did you
say?”

“I said to Cecil, ‘Take her or leave her; it’s no business of mine!’”

“What a helpful answer!” But her own answer, though more normal in its
wording, had been to the same effect.

“The bother is this,” began Freddy.

Then he took up his work again, too shy to say what the bother was.
Mrs. Honeychurch went back to the window.

“Freddy, you must come. There they still are!”

“I don’t see you ought to go peeping like that.”

“Peeping like that! Can’t I look out of my own window?”

But she returned to the writing-table, observing, as she passed her
son, “Still page 322?” Freddy snorted, and turned over two leaves. For
a brief space they were silent. Close by, beyond the curtains, the
gentle murmur of a long conversation had never ceased.

“The bother is this: I have put my foot in it with Cecil most awfully.”
He gave a nervous gulp. “Not content with ‘permission’, which I did
give—that is to say, I said, ‘I don’t mind’—well, not content with
that, he wanted to know whether I wasn’t off my head with joy. He
practically put it like this: Wasn’t it a splendid thing for Lucy and
for Windy Corner generally if he married her? And he would have an
answer—he said it would strengthen his hand.”

“I hope you gave a careful answer, dear.”

“I answered ‘No’” said the boy, grinding his teeth. “There! Fly into a
stew! I can’t help it—had to say it. I had to say no. He ought never to
have asked me.”

“Ridiculous child!” cried his mother. “You think you’re so holy and
truthful, but really it’s only abominable conceit. Do you suppose that
a man like Cecil would take the slightest notice of anything you say? I
hope he boxed your ears. How dare you say no?”

“Oh, do keep quiet, mother! I had to say no when I couldn’t say yes. I
tried to laugh as if I didn’t mean what I said, and, as Cecil laughed
too, and went away, it may be all right. But I feel my foot’s in it.
Oh, do keep quiet, though, and let a man do some work.”

“No,” said Mrs. Honeychurch, with the air of one who has considered the
subject, “I shall not keep quiet. You know all that has passed between
them in Rome; you know why he is down here, and yet you deliberately
insult him, and try to turn him out of my house.”

“Not a bit!” he pleaded. “I only let out I didn’t like him. I don’t
hate him, but I don’t like him. What I mind is that he’ll tell Lucy.”

He glanced at the curtains dismally.

“Well, _I_ like him,” said Mrs. Honeychurch. “I know his mother; he’s
good, he’s clever, he’s rich, he’s well connected—Oh, you needn’t kick
the piano! He’s well connected—I’ll say it again if you like: he’s well
connected.” She paused, as if rehearsing her eulogy, but her face
remained dissatisfied. She added: “And he has beautiful manners.”

“I liked him till just now. I suppose it’s having him spoiling Lucy’s
first week at home; and it’s also something that Mr. Beebe said, not
knowing.”

“Mr. Beebe?” said his mother, trying to conceal her interest. “I don’t
see how Mr. Beebe comes in.”

“You know Mr. Beebe’s funny way, when you never quite know what he
means. He said: ‘Mr. Vyse is an ideal bachelor.’ I was very cute, I
asked him what he meant. He said ‘Oh, he’s like me—better detached.’ I
couldn’t make him say any more, but it set me thinking. Since Cecil has
come after Lucy he hasn’t been so pleasant, at least—I can’t explain.”

“You never can, dear. But I can. You are jealous of Cecil because he
may stop Lucy knitting you silk ties.”

The explanation seemed plausible, and Freddy tried to accept it. But at
the back of his brain there lurked a dim mistrust. Cecil praised one
too much for being athletic. Was that it? Cecil made one talk in one’s
own way. This tired one. Was that it? And Cecil was the kind of fellow
who would never wear another fellow’s cap. Unaware of his own
profundity, Freddy checked himself. He must be jealous, or he would not
dislike a man for such foolish reasons.

“Will this do?” called his mother. “‘Dear Mrs. Vyse,—Cecil has just
asked my permission about it, and I should be delighted if Lucy wishes
it.’ Then I put in at the top, ‘and I have told Lucy so.’ I must write
the letter out again—‘and I have told Lucy so. But Lucy seems very
uncertain, and in these days young people must decide for themselves.’
I said that because I didn’t want Mrs. Vyse to think us old-fashioned.
She goes in for lectures and improving her mind, and all the time a
thick layer of flue under the beds, and the maid’s dirty thumb-marks
where you turn on the electric light. She keeps that flat abominably—”

“Suppose Lucy marries Cecil, would she live in a flat, or in the
country?”

“Don’t interrupt so foolishly. Where was I? Oh yes—‘Young people must
decide for themselves. I know that Lucy likes your son, because she
tells me everything, and she wrote to me from Rome when he asked her
first.’ No, I’ll cross that last bit out—it looks patronizing. I’ll
stop at ‘because she tells me everything.’ Or shall I cross that out,
too?”

“Cross it out, too,” said Freddy.

Mrs. Honeychurch left it in.

“Then the whole thing runs: ‘Dear Mrs. Vyse.—Cecil has just asked my
permission about it, and I should be delighted if Lucy wishes it, and I
have told Lucy so. But Lucy seems very uncertain, and in these days
young people must decide for themselves. I know that Lucy likes your
son, because she tells me everything. But I do not know—’”

“Look out!” cried Freddy.

The curtains parted.

Cecil’s first movement was one of irritation. He couldn’t bear the
Honeychurch habit of sitting in the dark to save the furniture.
Instinctively he give the curtains a twitch, and sent them swinging
down their poles. Light entered. There was revealed a terrace, such as
is owned by many villas with trees each side of it, and on it a little
rustic seat, and two flower-beds. But it was transfigured by the view
beyond, for Windy Corner was built on the range that overlooks the
Sussex Weald. Lucy, who was in the little seat, seemed on the edge of a
green magic carpet which hovered in the air above the tremulous world.

Cecil entered.

Appearing thus late in the story, Cecil must be at once described. He
was medieval. Like a Gothic statue. Tall and refined, with shoulders
that seemed braced square by an effort of the will, and a head that was
tilted a little higher than the usual level of vision, he resembled
those fastidious saints who guard the portals of a French cathedral.
Well educated, well endowed, and not deficient physically, he remained
in the grip of a certain devil whom the modern world knows as
self-consciousness, and whom the medieval, with dimmer vision,
worshipped as asceticism. A Gothic statue implies celibacy, just as a
Greek statue implies fruition, and perhaps this was what Mr. Beebe
meant. And Freddy, who ignored history and art, perhaps meant the same
when he failed to imagine Cecil wearing another fellow’s cap.

Mrs. Honeychurch left her letter on the writing table and moved towards
her young acquaintance.

“Oh, Cecil!” she exclaimed—“oh, Cecil, do tell me!”

“I promessi sposi,” said he.

They stared at him anxiously.

“She has accepted me,” he said, and the sound of the thing in English
made him flush and smile with pleasure, and look more human.

“I am so glad,” said Mrs. Honeychurch, while Freddy proffered a hand
that was yellow with chemicals. They wished that they also knew
Italian, for our phrases of approval and of amazement are so connected
with little occasions that we fear to use them on great ones. We are
obliged to become vaguely poetic, or to take refuge in Scriptural
reminiscences.

“Welcome as one of the family!” said Mrs. Honeychurch, waving her hand
at the furniture. “This is indeed a joyous day! I feel sure that you
will make our dear Lucy happy.”

“I hope so,” replied the young man, shifting his eyes to the ceiling.

“We mothers—” simpered Mrs. Honeychurch, and then realized that she was
affected, sentimental, bombastic—all the things she hated most. Why
could she not be Freddy, who stood stiff in the middle of the room;
looking very cross and almost handsome?

“I say, Lucy!” called Cecil, for conversation seemed to flag.

Lucy rose from the seat. She moved across the lawn and smiled in at
them, just as if she was going to ask them to play tennis. Then she saw
her brother’s face. Her lips parted, and she took him in her arms. He
said, “Steady on!”

“Not a kiss for me?” asked her mother.

Lucy kissed her also.

“Would you take them into the garden and tell Mrs. Honeychurch all
about it?” Cecil suggested. “And I’d stop here and tell my mother.”

“We go with Lucy?” said Freddy, as if taking orders.

“Yes, you go with Lucy.”

They passed into the sunlight. Cecil watched them cross the terrace,
and descend out of sight by the steps. They would descend—he knew their
ways—past the shrubbery, and past the tennis-lawn and the dahlia-bed,
until they reached the kitchen garden, and there, in the presence of
the potatoes and the peas, the great event would be discussed.

Smiling indulgently, he lit a cigarette, and rehearsed the events that
had led to such a happy conclusion.

He had known Lucy for several years, but only as a commonplace girl who
happened to be musical. He could still remember his depression that
afternoon at Rome, when she and her terrible cousin fell on him out of
the blue, and demanded to be taken to St. Peter’s. That day she had
seemed a typical tourist—shrill, crude, and gaunt with travel. But
Italy worked some marvel in her. It gave her light, and—which he held
more precious—it gave her shadow. Soon he detected in her a wonderful
reticence. She was like a woman of Leonardo da Vinci’s, whom we love
not so much for herself as for the things that she will not tell us.
The things are assuredly not of this life; no woman of Leonardo’s could
have anything so vulgar as a “story.” She did develop most wonderfully
day by day.

So it happened that from patronizing civility he had slowly passed if
not to passion, at least to a profound uneasiness. Already at Rome he
had hinted to her that they might be suitable for each other. It had
touched him greatly that she had not broken away at the suggestion. Her
refusal had been clear and gentle; after it—as the horrid phrase
went—she had been exactly the same to him as before. Three months
later, on the margin of Italy, among the flower-clad Alps, he had asked
her again in bald, traditional language. She reminded him of a Leonardo
more than ever; her sunburnt features were shadowed by fantastic rock;
at his words she had turned and stood between him and the light with
immeasurable plains behind her. He walked home with her unashamed,
feeling not at all like a rejected suitor. The things that really
mattered were unshaken.

So now he had asked her once more, and, clear and gentle as ever, she
had accepted him, giving no coy reasons for her delay, but simply
saying that she loved him and would do her best to make him happy. His
mother, too, would be pleased; she had counselled the step; he must
write her a long account.

Glancing at his hand, in case any of Freddy’s chemicals had come off on
it, he moved to the writing table. There he saw “Dear Mrs. Vyse,”
followed by many erasures. He recoiled without reading any more, and
after a little hesitation sat down elsewhere, and pencilled a note on
his knee.

Then he lit another cigarette, which did not seem quite as divine as
the first, and considered what might be done to make Windy Corner
drawing-room more distinctive. With that outlook it should have been a
successful room, but the trail of Tottenham Court Road was upon it; he
could almost visualize the motor-vans of Messrs. Shoolbred and Messrs.
Maple arriving at the door and depositing this chair, those varnished
book-cases, that writing-table. The table recalled Mrs. Honeychurch’s
letter. He did not want to read that letter—his temptations never lay
in that direction; but he worried about it none the less. It was his
own fault that she was discussing him with his mother; he had wanted
her support in his third attempt to win Lucy; he wanted to feel that
others, no matter who they were, agreed with him, and so he had asked
their permission. Mrs. Honeychurch had been civil, but obtuse in
essentials, while as for Freddy—“He is only a boy,” he reflected. “I
represent all that he despises. Why should he want me for a
brother-in-law?”

The Honeychurches were a worthy family, but he began to realize that
Lucy was of another clay; and perhaps—he did not put it very
definitely—he ought to introduce her into more congenial circles as
soon as possible.

“Mr. Beebe!” said the maid, and the new rector of Summer Street was
shown in; he had at once started on friendly relations, owing to Lucy’s
praise of him in her letters from Florence.

Cecil greeted him rather critically.

“I’ve come for tea, Mr. Vyse. Do you suppose that I shall get it?”

“I should say so. Food is the thing one does get here—Don’t sit in that
chair; young Honeychurch has left a bone in it.”

“Pfui!”

“I know,” said Cecil. “I know. I can’t think why Mrs. Honeychurch
allows it.”

For Cecil considered the bone and the Maples’ furniture separately; he
did not realize that, taken together, they kindled the room into the
life that he desired.

“I’ve come for tea and for gossip. Isn’t this news?”

“News? I don’t understand you,” said Cecil. “News?”

Mr. Beebe, whose news was of a very different nature, prattled forward.

“I met Sir Harry Otway as I came up; I have every reason to hope that I
am first in the field. He has bought Cissie and Albert from Mr. Flack!”

“Has he indeed?” said Cecil, trying to recover himself. Into what a
grotesque mistake had he fallen! Was it likely that a clergyman and a
gentleman would refer to his engagement in a manner so flippant? But
his stiffness remained, and, though he asked who Cissie and Albert
might be, he still thought Mr. Beebe rather a bounder.

“Unpardonable question! To have stopped a week at Windy Corner and not
to have met Cissie and Albert, the semi-detached villas that have been
run up opposite the church! I’ll set Mrs. Honeychurch after you.”

“I’m shockingly stupid over local affairs,” said the young man
languidly. “I can’t even remember the difference between a Parish
Council and a Local Government Board. Perhaps there is no difference,
or perhaps those aren’t the right names. I only go into the country to
see my friends and to enjoy the scenery. It is very remiss of me. Italy
and London are the only places where I don’t feel to exist on
sufferance.”

Mr. Beebe, distressed at this heavy reception of Cissie and Albert,
determined to shift the subject.

“Let me see, Mr. Vyse—I forget—what is your profession?”

“I have no profession,” said Cecil. “It is another example of my
decadence. My attitude—quite an indefensible one—is that so long as I
am no trouble to any one I have a right to do as I like. I know I ought
to be getting money out of people, or devoting myself to things I don’t
care a straw about, but somehow, I’ve not been able to begin.”

“You are very fortunate,” said Mr. Beebe. “It is a wonderful
opportunity, the possession of leisure.”

His voice was rather parochial, but he did not quite see his way to
answering naturally. He felt, as all who have regular occupation must
feel, that others should have it also.

“I am glad that you approve. I daren’t face the healthy person—for
example, Freddy Honeychurch.”

“Oh, Freddy’s a good sort, isn’t he?”

“Admirable. The sort who has made England what she is.”

Cecil wondered at himself. Why, on this day of all others, was he so
hopelessly contrary? He tried to get right by inquiring effusively
after Mr. Beebe’s mother, an old lady for whom he had no particular
regard. Then he flattered the clergyman, praised his
liberal-mindedness, his enlightened attitude towards philosophy and
science.

“Where are the others?” said Mr. Beebe at last, “I insist on extracting
tea before evening service.”

“I suppose Anne never told them you were here. In this house one is so
coached in the servants the day one arrives. The fault of Anne is that
she begs your pardon when she hears you perfectly, and kicks the
chair-legs with her feet. The faults of Mary—I forget the faults of
Mary, but they are very grave. Shall we look in the garden?”

“I know the faults of Mary. She leaves the dust-pans standing on the
stairs.”

“The fault of Euphemia is that she will not, simply will not, chop the
suet sufficiently small.”

They both laughed, and things began to go better.

“The faults of Freddy—” Cecil continued.

“Ah, he has too many. No one but his mother can remember the faults of
Freddy. Try the faults of Miss Honeychurch; they are not innumerable.”

“She has none,” said the young man, with grave sincerity.

“I quite agree. At present she has none.”

“At present?”

“I’m not cynical. I’m only thinking of my pet theory about Miss
Honeychurch. Does it seem reasonable that she should play so
wonderfully, and live so quietly? I suspect that one day she will be
wonderful in both. The water-tight compartments in her will break down,
and music and life will mingle. Then we shall have her heroically good,
heroically bad—too heroic, perhaps, to be good or bad.”

Cecil found his companion interesting.

“And at present you think her not wonderful as far as life goes?”

“Well, I must say I’ve only seen her at Tunbridge Wells, where she was
not wonderful, and at Florence. Since I came to Summer Street she has
been away. You saw her, didn’t you, at Rome and in the Alps. Oh, I
forgot; of course, you knew her before. No, she wasn’t wonderful in
Florence either, but I kept on expecting that she would be.”

“In what way?”

Conversation had become agreeable to them, and they were pacing up and
down the terrace.

“I could as easily tell you what tune she’ll play next. There was
simply the sense that she had found wings, and meant to use them. I can
show you a beautiful picture in my Italian diary: Miss Honeychurch as a
kite, Miss Bartlett holding the string. Picture number two: the string
breaks.”

The sketch was in his diary, but it had been made afterwards, when he
viewed things artistically. At the time he had given surreptitious tugs
to the string himself.

“But the string never broke?”

“No. I mightn’t have seen Miss Honeychurch rise, but I should certainly
have heard Miss Bartlett fall.”

“It has broken now,” said the young man in low, vibrating tones.

Immediately he realized that of all the conceited, ludicrous,
contemptible ways of announcing an engagement this was the worst. He
cursed his love of metaphor; had he suggested that he was a star and
that Lucy was soaring up to reach him?

“Broken? What do you mean?”

“I meant,” said Cecil stiffly, “that she is going to marry me.”

The clergyman was conscious of some bitter disappointment which he
could not keep out of his voice.

“I am sorry; I must apologize. I had no idea you were intimate with
her, or I should never have talked in this flippant, superficial way.
Mr. Vyse, you ought to have stopped me.” And down the garden he saw
Lucy herself; yes, he was disappointed.

Cecil, who naturally preferred congratulations to apologies, drew down
his mouth at the corners. Was this the reception his action would get
from the world? Of course, he despised the world as a whole; every
thoughtful man should; it is almost a test of refinement. But he was
sensitive to the successive particles of it which he encountered.

Occasionally he could be quite crude.

“I am sorry I have given you a shock,” he said dryly. “I fear that
Lucy’s choice does not meet with your approval.”

“Not that. But you ought to have stopped me. I know Miss Honeychurch
only a little as time goes. Perhaps I oughtn’t to have discussed her so
freely with any one; certainly not with you.”

“You are conscious of having said something indiscreet?”

Mr. Beebe pulled himself together. Really, Mr. Vyse had the art of
placing one in the most tiresome positions. He was driven to use the
prerogatives of his profession.

“No, I have said nothing indiscreet. I foresaw at Florence that her
quiet, uneventful childhood must end, and it has ended. I realized
dimly enough that she might take some momentous step. She has taken it.
She has learnt—you will let me talk freely, as I have begun freely—she
has learnt what it is to love: the greatest lesson, some people will
tell you, that our earthly life provides.” It was now time for him to
wave his hat at the approaching trio. He did not omit to do so. “She
has learnt through you,” and if his voice was still clerical, it was
now also sincere; “let it be your care that her knowledge is profitable
to her.”

“Grazie tante!” said Cecil, who did not like parsons.

“Have you heard?” shouted Mrs. Honeychurch as she toiled up the sloping
garden. “Oh, Mr. Beebe, have you heard the news?”

Freddy, now full of geniality, whistled the wedding march. Youth seldom
criticizes the accomplished fact.

“Indeed I have!” he cried. He looked at Lucy. In her presence he could
not act the parson any longer—at all events not without apology. “Mrs.
Honeychurch, I’m going to do what I am always supposed to do, but
generally I’m too shy. I want to invoke every kind of blessing on them,
grave and gay, great and small. I want them all their lives to be
supremely good and supremely happy as husband and wife, as father and
mother. And now I want my tea.”

“You only asked for it just in time,” the lady retorted. “How dare you
be serious at Windy Corner?”

He took his tone from her. There was no more heavy beneficence, no more
attempts to dignify the situation with poetry or the Scriptures. None
of them dared or was able to be serious any more.

An engagement is so potent a thing that sooner or later it reduces all
who speak of it to this state of cheerful awe. Away from it, in the
solitude of their rooms, Mr. Beebe, and even Freddy, might again be
critical. But in its presence and in the presence of each other they
were sincerely hilarious. It has a strange power, for it compels not
only the lips, but the very heart. The chief parallel to compare one
great thing with another—is the power over us of a temple of some alien
creed. Standing outside, we deride or oppose it, or at the most feel
sentimental. Inside, though the saints and gods are not ours, we become
true believers, in case any true believer should be present.

So it was that after the gropings and the misgivings of the afternoon
they pulled themselves together and settled down to a very pleasant
tea-party. If they were hypocrites they did not know it, and their
hypocrisy had every chance of setting and of becoming true. Anne,
putting down each plate as if it were a wedding present, stimulated
them greatly. They could not lag behind that smile of hers which she
gave them ere she kicked the drawing-room door. Mr. Beebe chirruped.
Freddy was at his wittiest, referring to Cecil as the “Fiasco”—family
honoured pun on fiance. Mrs. Honeychurch, amusing and portly, promised
well as a mother-in-law. As for Lucy and Cecil, for whom the temple had
been built, they also joined in the merry ritual, but waited, as
earnest worshippers should, for the disclosure of some holier shrine of
joy.




Chapter IX
Lucy As a Work of Art


A few days after the engagement was announced Mrs. Honeychurch made
Lucy and her Fiasco come to a little garden-party in the neighbourhood,
for naturally she wanted to show people that her daughter was marrying
a presentable man.

Cecil was more than presentable; he looked distinguished, and it was
very pleasant to see his slim figure keeping step with Lucy, and his
long, fair face responding when Lucy spoke to him. People congratulated
Mrs. Honeychurch, which is, I believe, a social blunder, but it pleased
her, and she introduced Cecil rather indiscriminately to some stuffy
dowagers.

At tea a misfortune took place: a cup of coffee was upset over Lucy’s
figured silk, and though Lucy feigned indifference, her mother feigned
nothing of the sort but dragged her indoors to have the frock treated
by a sympathetic maid. They were gone some time, and Cecil was left
with the dowagers. When they returned he was not as pleasant as he had
been.

“Do you go to much of this sort of thing?” he asked when they were
driving home.

“Oh, now and then,” said Lucy, who had rather enjoyed herself.

“Is it typical of country society?”

“I suppose so. Mother, would it be?”

“Plenty of society,” said Mrs. Honeychurch, who was trying to remember
the hang of one of the dresses.

Seeing that her thoughts were elsewhere, Cecil bent towards Lucy and
said:

“To me it seemed perfectly appalling, disastrous, portentous.”

“I am so sorry that you were stranded.”

“Not that, but the congratulations. It is so disgusting, the way an
engagement is regarded as public property—a kind of waste place where
every outsider may shoot his vulgar sentiment. All those old women
smirking!”

“One has to go through it, I suppose. They won’t notice us so much next
time.”

“But my point is that their whole attitude is wrong. An
engagement—horrid word in the first place—is a private matter, and
should be treated as such.”

Yet the smirking old women, however wrong individually, were racially
correct. The spirit of the generations had smiled through them,
rejoicing in the engagement of Cecil and Lucy because it promised the
continuance of life on earth. To Cecil and Lucy it promised something
quite different—personal love. Hence Cecil’s irritation and Lucy’s
belief that his irritation was just.

“How tiresome!” she said. “Couldn’t you have escaped to tennis?”

“I don’t play tennis—at least, not in public. The neighbourhood is
deprived of the romance of me being athletic. Such romance as I have is
that of the Inglese Italianato.”

“Inglese Italianato?”

“E un diavolo incarnato! You know the proverb?”

She did not. Nor did it seem applicable to a young man who had spent a
quiet winter in Rome with his mother. But Cecil, since his engagement,
had taken to affect a cosmopolitan naughtiness which he was far from
possessing.

“Well,” said he, “I cannot help it if they do disapprove of me. There
are certain irremovable barriers between myself and them, and I must
accept them.”

“We all have our limitations, I suppose,” said wise Lucy.

“Sometimes they are forced on us, though,” said Cecil, who saw from her
remark that she did not quite understand his position.

“How?”

“It makes a difference doesn’t it, whether we fully fence ourselves in,
or whether we are fenced out by the barriers of others?”

She thought a moment, and agreed that it did make a difference.

“Difference?” cried Mrs. Honeychurch, suddenly alert. “I don’t see any
difference. Fences are fences, especially when they are in the same
place.”

“We were speaking of motives,” said Cecil, on whom the interruption
jarred.

“My dear Cecil, look here.” She spread out her knees and perched her
card-case on her lap. “This is me. That’s Windy Corner. The rest of the
pattern is the other people. Motives are all very well, but the fence
comes here.”

“We weren’t talking of real fences,” said Lucy, laughing.

“Oh, I see, dear—poetry.”

She leant placidly back. Cecil wondered why Lucy had been amused.

“I tell you who has no ‘fences,’ as you call them,” she said, “and
that’s Mr. Beebe.”

“A parson fenceless would mean a parson defenceless.”

Lucy was slow to follow what people said, but quick enough to detect
what they meant. She missed Cecil’s epigram, but grasped the feeling
that prompted it.

“Don’t you like Mr. Beebe?” she asked thoughtfully.

“I never said so!” he cried. “I consider him far above the average. I
only denied—” And he swept off on the subject of fences again, and was
brilliant.

“Now, a clergyman that I do hate,” said she wanting to say something
sympathetic, “a clergyman that does have fences, and the most dreadful
ones, is Mr. Eager, the English chaplain at Florence. He was truly
insincere—not merely the manner unfortunate. He was a snob, and so
conceited, and he did say such unkind things.”

“What sort of things?”

“There was an old man at the Bertolini whom he said had murdered his
wife.”

“Perhaps he had.”

“No!”

“Why ‘no’?”

“He was such a nice old man, I’m sure.”

Cecil laughed at her feminine inconsequence.

“Well, I did try to sift the thing. Mr. Eager would never come to the
point. He prefers it vague—said the old man had ‘practically’ murdered
his wife—had murdered her in the sight of God.”

“Hush, dear!” said Mrs. Honeychurch absently.

“But isn’t it intolerable that a person whom we’re told to imitate
should go round spreading slander? It was, I believe, chiefly owing to
him that the old man was dropped. People pretended he was vulgar, but
he certainly wasn’t that.”

“Poor old man! What was his name?”

“Harris,” said Lucy glibly.

“Let’s hope that Mrs. Harris there warn’t no sich person,” said her
mother.

Cecil nodded intelligently.

“Isn’t Mr. Eager a parson of the cultured type?” he asked.

“I don’t know. I hate him. I’ve heard him lecture on Giotto. I hate
him. Nothing can hide a petty nature. I _hate_ him.”

“My goodness gracious me, child!” said Mrs. Honeychurch. “You’ll blow
my head off! Whatever is there to shout over? I forbid you and Cecil to
hate any more clergymen.”

He smiled. There was indeed something rather incongruous in Lucy’s
moral outburst over Mr. Eager. It was as if one should see the Leonardo
on the ceiling of the Sistine. He longed to hint to her that not here
lay her vocation; that a woman’s power and charm reside in mystery, not
in muscular rant. But possibly rant is a sign of vitality: it mars the
beautiful creature, but shows that she is alive. After a moment, he
contemplated her flushed face and excited gestures with a certain
approval. He forebore to repress the sources of youth.

Nature—simplest of topics, he thought—lay around them. He praised the
pine-woods, the deep lasts of bracken, the crimson leaves that spotted
the hurt-bushes, the serviceable beauty of the turnpike road. The
outdoor world was not very familiar to him, and occasionally he went
wrong in a question of fact. Mrs. Honeychurch’s mouth twitched when he
spoke of the perpetual green of the larch.

“I count myself a lucky person,” he concluded, “When I’m in London I
feel I could never live out of it. When I’m in the country I feel the
same about the country. After all, I do believe that birds and trees
and the sky are the most wonderful things in life, and that the people
who live amongst them must be the best. It’s true that in nine cases
out of ten they don’t seem to notice anything. The country gentleman
and the country labourer are each in their way the most depressing of
companions. Yet they may have a tacit sympathy with the workings of
Nature which is denied to us of the town. Do you feel that, Mrs.
Honeychurch?”

Mrs. Honeychurch started and smiled. She had not been attending. Cecil,
who was rather crushed on the front seat of the victoria, felt
irritable, and determined not to say anything interesting again.

Lucy had not attended either. Her brow was wrinkled, and she still
looked furiously cross—the result, he concluded, of too much moral
gymnastics. It was sad to see her thus blind to the beauties of an
August wood.

“‘Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height,’” he quoted, and
touched her knee with his own.

She flushed again and said: “What height?”

“‘Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height,
What pleasure lives in height (the shepherd sang).
In height and in the splendour of the hills?’


Let us take Mrs. Honeychurch’s advice and hate clergymen no more.
What’s this place?”

“Summer Street, of course,” said Lucy, and roused herself.

The woods had opened to leave space for a sloping triangular meadow.
Pretty cottages lined it on two sides, and the upper and third side was
occupied by a new stone church, expensively simple, a charming shingled
spire. Mr. Beebe’s house was near the church. In height it scarcely
exceeded the cottages. Some great mansions were at hand, but they were
hidden in the trees. The scene suggested a Swiss Alp rather than the
shrine and centre of a leisured world, and was marred only by two ugly
little villas—the villas that had competed with Cecil’s engagement,
having been acquired by Sir Harry Otway the very afternoon that Lucy
had been acquired by Cecil.

“Cissie” was the name of one of these villas, “Albert” of the other.
These titles were not only picked out in shaded Gothic on the garden
gates, but appeared a second time on the porches, where they followed
the semicircular curve of the entrance arch in block capitals. “Albert”
was inhabited. His tortured garden was bright with geraniums and
lobelias and polished shells. His little windows were chastely swathed
in Nottingham lace. “Cissie” was to let. Three notice-boards, belonging
to Dorking agents, lolled on her fence and announced the not surprising
fact. Her paths were already weedy; her pocket-handkerchief of a lawn
was yellow with dandelions.

“The place is ruined!” said the ladies mechanically. “Summer Street
will never be the same again.”

As the carriage passed, “Cissie’s” door opened, and a gentleman came
out of her.

“Stop!” cried Mrs. Honeychurch, touching the coachman with her parasol.
“Here’s Sir Harry. Now we shall know. Sir Harry, pull those things down
at once!”

Sir Harry Otway—who need not be described—came to the carriage and said
“Mrs. Honeychurch, I meant to. I can’t, I really can’t turn out Miss
Flack.”

“Am I not always right? She ought to have gone before the contract was
signed. Does she still live rent free, as she did in her nephew’s
time?”

“But what can I do?” He lowered his voice. “An old lady, so very
vulgar, and almost bedridden.”

“Turn her out,” said Cecil bravely.

Sir Harry sighed, and looked at the villas mournfully. He had had full
warning of Mr. Flack’s intentions, and might have bought the plot
before building commenced: but he was apathetic and dilatory. He had
known Summer Street for so many years that he could not imagine it
being spoilt. Not till Mrs. Flack had laid the foundation stone, and
the apparition of red and cream brick began to rise did he take alarm.
He called on Mr. Flack, the local builder,—a most reasonable and
respectful man—who agreed that tiles would have made more artistic
roof, but pointed out that slates were cheaper. He ventured to differ,
however, about the Corinthian columns which were to cling like leeches
to the frames of the bow windows, saying that, for his part, he liked
to relieve the façade by a bit of decoration. Sir Harry hinted that a
column, if possible, should be structural as well as decorative.

Mr. Flack replied that all the columns had been ordered, adding, “and
all the capitals different—one with dragons in the foliage, another
approaching to the Ionian style, another introducing Mrs. Flack’s
initials—every one different.” For he had read his Ruskin. He built his
villas according to his desire; and not until he had inserted an
immovable aunt into one of them did Sir Harry buy.

This futile and unprofitable transaction filled the knight with sadness
as he leant on Mrs. Honeychurch’s carriage. He had failed in his duties
to the country-side, and the country-side was laughing at him as well.
He had spent money, and yet Summer Street was spoilt as much as ever.
All he could do now was to find a desirable tenant for “Cissie”—someone
really desirable.

“The rent is absurdly low,” he told them, “and perhaps I am an easy
landlord. But it is such an awkward size. It is too large for the
peasant class and too small for any one the least like ourselves.”

Cecil had been hesitating whether he should despise the villas or
despise Sir Harry for despising them. The latter impulse seemed the
more fruitful.

“You ought to find a tenant at once,” he said maliciously. “It would be
a perfect paradise for a bank clerk.”

“Exactly!” said Sir Harry excitedly. “That is exactly what I fear, Mr.
Vyse. It will attract the wrong type of people. The train service has
improved—a fatal improvement, to my mind. And what are five miles from
a station in these days of bicycles?”

“Rather a strenuous clerk it would be,” said Lucy.

Cecil, who had his full share of mediaeval mischievousness, replied
that the physique of the lower middle classes was improving at a most
appalling rate. She saw that he was laughing at their harmless
neighbour, and roused herself to stop him.

“Sir Harry!” she exclaimed, “I have an idea. How would you like
spinsters?”

“My dear Lucy, it would be splendid. Do you know any such?”

“Yes; I met them abroad.”

“Gentlewomen?” he asked tentatively.

“Yes, indeed, and at the present moment homeless. I heard from them
last week—Miss Teresa and Miss Catharine Alan. I’m really not joking.
They are quite the right people. Mr. Beebe knows them, too. May I tell
them to write to you?”

“Indeed you may!” he cried. “Here we are with the difficulty solved
already. How delightful it is! Extra facilities—please tell them they
shall have extra facilities, for I shall have no agents’ fees. Oh, the
agents! The appalling people they have sent me! One woman, when I
wrote—a tactful letter, you know—asking her to explain her social
position to me, replied that she would pay the rent in advance. As if
one cares about that! And several references I took up were most
unsatisfactory—people swindlers, or not respectable. And oh, the
deceit! I have seen a good deal of the seamy side this last week. The
deceit of the most promising people. My dear Lucy, the deceit!”

She nodded.

“My advice,” put in Mrs. Honeychurch, “is to have nothing to do with
Lucy and her decayed gentlewomen at all. I know the type. Preserve me
from people who have seen better days, and bring heirlooms with them
that make the house smell stuffy. It’s a sad thing, but I’d far rather
let to some one who is going up in the world than to someone who has
come down.”

“I think I follow you,” said Sir Harry; “but it is, as you say, a very
sad thing.”

“The Misses Alan aren’t that!” cried Lucy.

“Yes, they are,” said Cecil. “I haven’t met them but I should say they
were a highly unsuitable addition to the neighbourhood.”

“Don’t listen to him, Sir Harry—he’s tiresome.”

“It’s I who am tiresome,” he replied. “I oughtn’t to come with my
troubles to young people. But really I am so worried, and Lady Otway
will only say that I cannot be too careful, which is quite true, but no
real help.”

“Then may I write to my Misses Alan?”

“Please!”

But his eye wavered when Mrs. Honeychurch exclaimed:

“Beware! They are certain to have canaries. Sir Harry, beware of
canaries: they spit the seed out through the bars of the cages and then
the mice come. Beware of women altogether. Only let to a man.”

“Really—” he murmured gallantly, though he saw the wisdom of her
remark.

“Men don’t gossip over tea-cups. If they get drunk, there’s an end of
them—they lie down comfortably and sleep it off. If they’re vulgar,
they somehow keep it to themselves. It doesn’t spread so. Give me a
man—of course, provided he’s clean.”

Sir Harry blushed. Neither he nor Cecil enjoyed these open compliments
to their sex. Even the exclusion of the dirty did not leave them much
distinction. He suggested that Mrs. Honeychurch, if she had time,
should descend from the carriage and inspect “Cissie” for herself. She
was delighted. Nature had intended her to be poor and to live in such a
house. Domestic arrangements always attracted her, especially when they
were on a small scale.

Cecil pulled Lucy back as she followed her mother.

“Mrs. Honeychurch,” he said, “what if we two walk home and leave you?”

“Certainly!” was her cordial reply.

Sir Harry likewise seemed almost too glad to get rid of them. He beamed
at them knowingly, said, “Aha! young people, young people!” and then
hastened to unlock the house.

“Hopeless vulgarian!” exclaimed Cecil, almost before they were out of
earshot.

“Oh, Cecil!”

“I can’t help it. It would be wrong not to loathe that man.”

“He isn’t clever, but really he is nice.”

“No, Lucy, he stands for all that is bad in country life. In London he
would keep his place. He would belong to a brainless club, and his wife
would give brainless dinner parties. But down here he acts the little
god with his gentility, and his patronage, and his sham aesthetics, and
every one—even your mother—is taken in.”

“All that you say is quite true,” said Lucy, though she felt
discouraged. “I wonder whether—whether it matters so very much.”

“It matters supremely. Sir Harry is the essence of that garden-party.
Oh, goodness, how cross I feel! How I do hope he’ll get some vulgar
tenant in that villa—some woman so really vulgar that he’ll notice it.
_Gentlefolks!_ Ugh! with his bald head and retreating chin! But let’s
forget him.”

This Lucy was glad enough to do. If Cecil disliked Sir Harry Otway and
Mr. Beebe, what guarantee was there that the people who really mattered
to her would escape? For instance, Freddy. Freddy was neither clever,
nor subtle, nor beautiful, and what prevented Cecil from saying, any
minute, “It would be wrong not to loathe Freddy”? And what would she
reply? Further than Freddy she did not go, but he gave her anxiety
enough. She could only assure herself that Cecil had known Freddy some
time, and that they had always got on pleasantly, except, perhaps,
during the last few days, which was an accident, perhaps.

“Which way shall we go?” she asked him.

Nature—simplest of topics, she thought—was around them. Summer Street
lay deep in the woods, and she had stopped where a footpath diverged
from the highroad.

“Are there two ways?”

“Perhaps the road is more sensible, as we’re got up smart.”

“I’d rather go through the wood,” said Cecil, With that subdued
irritation that she had noticed in him all the afternoon. “Why is it,
Lucy, that you always say the road? Do you know that you have never
once been with me in the fields or the wood since we were engaged?”

“Haven’t I? The wood, then,” said Lucy, startled at his queerness, but
pretty sure that he would explain later; it was not his habit to leave
her in doubt as to his meaning.

She led the way into the whispering pines, and sure enough he did
explain before they had gone a dozen yards.

“I had got an idea—I dare say wrongly—that you feel more at home with
me in a room.”

“A room?” she echoed, hopelessly bewildered.

“Yes. Or, at the most, in a garden, or on a road. Never in the real
country like this.”

“Oh, Cecil, whatever do you mean? I have never felt anything of the
sort. You talk as if I was a kind of poetess sort of person.”

“I don’t know that you aren’t. I connect you with a view—a certain type
of view. Why shouldn’t you connect me with a room?”

She reflected a moment, and then said, laughing:

“Do you know that you’re right? I do. I must be a poetess after all.
When I think of you it’s always as in a room. How funny!”

To her surprise, he seemed annoyed.

“A drawing-room, pray? With no view?”

“Yes, with no view, I fancy. Why not?”

“I’d rather,” he said reproachfully, “that you connected me with the
open air.”

She said again, “Oh, Cecil, whatever do you mean?”

As no explanation was forthcoming, she shook off the subject as too
difficult for a girl, and led him further into the wood, pausing every
now and then at some particularly beautiful or familiar combination of
the trees. She had known the wood between Summer Street and Windy
Corner ever since she could walk alone; she had played at losing Freddy
in it, when Freddy was a purple-faced baby; and though she had been to
Italy, it had lost none of its charm.

Presently they came to a little clearing among the pines—another tiny
green alp, solitary this time, and holding in its bosom a shallow pool.

She exclaimed, “The Sacred Lake!”

“Why do you call it that?”

“I can’t remember why. I suppose it comes out of some book. It’s only a
puddle now, but you see that stream going through it? Well, a good deal
of water comes down after heavy rains, and can’t get away at once, and
the pool becomes quite large and beautiful. Then Freddy used to bathe
there. He is very fond of it.”

“And you?”

He meant, “Are you fond of it?” But she answered dreamily, “I bathed
here, too, till I was found out. Then there was a row.”

At another time he might have been shocked, for he had depths of
prudishness within him. But now? with his momentary cult of the fresh
air, he was delighted at her admirable simplicity. He looked at her as
she stood by the pool’s edge. She was got up smart, as she phrased it,
and she reminded him of some brilliant flower that has no leaves of its
own, but blooms abruptly out of a world of green.

“Who found you out?”

“Charlotte,” she murmured. “She was stopping with us.
Charlotte—Charlotte.”

“Poor girl!”

She smiled gravely. A certain scheme, from which hitherto he had
shrunk, now appeared practical.

“Lucy!”

“Yes, I suppose we ought to be going,” was her reply.

“Lucy, I want to ask something of you that I have never asked before.”

At the serious note in his voice she stepped frankly and kindly towards
him.

“What, Cecil?”

“Hitherto never—not even that day on the lawn when you agreed to marry
me—”

He became self-conscious and kept glancing round to see if they were
observed. His courage had gone.

“Yes?”

“Up to now I have never kissed you.”

She was as scarlet as if he had put the thing most indelicately.

“No—more you have,” she stammered.

“Then I ask you—may I now?”

“Of course, you may, Cecil. You might before. I can’t run at you, you
know.”

At that supreme moment he was conscious of nothing but absurdities. Her
reply was inadequate. She gave such a business-like lift to her veil.
As he approached her he found time to wish that he could recoil. As he
touched her, his gold pince-nez became dislodged and was flattened
between them.

Such was the embrace. He considered, with truth, that it had been a
failure. Passion should believe itself irresistible. It should forget
civility and consideration and all the other curses of a refined
nature. Above all, it should never ask for leave where there is a right
of way. Why could he not do as any labourer or navvy—nay, as any young
man behind the counter would have done? He recast the scene. Lucy was
standing flowerlike by the water, he rushed up and took her in his
arms; she rebuked him, permitted him and revered him ever after for his
manliness. For he believed that women revere men for their manliness.

They left the pool in silence, after this one salutation. He waited for
her to make some remark which should show him her inmost thoughts. At
last she spoke, and with fitting gravity.

“Emerson was the name, not Harris.”

“What name?”

“The old man’s.”

“What old man?”

“That old man I told you about. The one Mr. Eager was so unkind to.”

He could not know that this was the most intimate conversation they had
ever had.




Chapter X
Cecil as a Humourist


The society out of which Cecil proposed to rescue Lucy was perhaps no
very splendid affair, yet it was more splendid than her antecedents
entitled her to. Her father, a prosperous local solicitor, had built
Windy Corner, as a speculation at the time the district was opening up,
and, falling in love with his own creation, had ended by living there
himself. Soon after his marriage the social atmosphere began to alter.
Other houses were built on the brow of that steep southern slope and
others, again, among the pine-trees behind, and northward on the chalk
barrier of the downs. Most of these houses were larger than Windy
Corner, and were filled by people who came, not from the district, but
from London, and who mistook the Honeychurches for the remnants of an
indigenous aristocracy. He was inclined to be frightened, but his wife
accepted the situation without either pride or humility. “I cannot
think what people are doing,” she would say, “but it is extremely
fortunate for the children.” She called everywhere; her calls were
returned with enthusiasm, and by the time people found out that she was
not exactly of their _milieu_, they liked her, and it did not seem to
matter. When Mr. Honeychurch died, he had the satisfaction—which few
honest solicitors despise—of leaving his family rooted in the best
society obtainable.

The best obtainable. Certainly many of the immigrants were rather dull,
and Lucy realized this more vividly since her return from Italy.
Hitherto she had accepted their ideals without questioning—their kindly
affluence, their inexplosive religion, their dislike of paper-bags,
orange-peel, and broken bottles. A Radical out and out, she learnt to
speak with horror of Suburbia. Life, so far as she troubled to conceive
it, was a circle of rich, pleasant people, with identical interests and
identical foes. In this circle, one thought, married, and died. Outside
it were poverty and vulgarity for ever trying to enter, just as the
London fog tries to enter the pine-woods pouring through the gaps in
the northern hills. But, in Italy, where any one who chooses may warm
himself in equality, as in the sun, this conception of life vanished.
Her senses expanded; she felt that there was no one whom she might not
get to like, that social barriers were irremovable, doubtless, but not
particularly high. You jump over them just as you jump into a peasant’s
olive-yard in the Apennines, and he is glad to see you. She returned
with new eyes.

So did Cecil; but Italy had quickened Cecil, not to tolerance, but to
irritation. He saw that the local society was narrow, but, instead of
saying, “Does that very much matter?” he rebelled, and tried to
substitute for it the society he called broad. He did not realize that
Lucy had consecrated her environment by the thousand little civilities
that create a tenderness in time, and that though her eyes saw its
defects, her heart refused to despise it entirely. Nor did he realize a
more important point—that if she was too great for this society, she
was too great for all society, and had reached the stage where personal
intercourse would alone satisfy her. A rebel she was, but not of the
kind he understood—a rebel who desired, not a wider dwelling-room, but
equality beside the man she loved. For Italy was offering her the most
priceless of all possessions—her own soul.

Playing bumble-puppy with Minnie Beebe, niece to the rector, and aged
thirteen—an ancient and most honourable game, which consists in
striking tennis-balls high into the air, so that they fall over the net
and immoderately bounce; some hit Mrs. Honeychurch; others are lost.
The sentence is confused, but the better illustrates Lucy’s state of
mind, for she was trying to talk to Mr. Beebe at the same time.

“Oh, it has been such a nuisance—first he, then they—no one knowing
what they wanted, and everyone so tiresome.”

“But they really are coming now,” said Mr. Beebe. “I wrote to Miss
Teresa a few days ago—she was wondering how often the butcher called,
and my reply of once a month must have impressed her favourably. They
are coming. I heard from them this morning.

“I shall hate those Miss Alans!” Mrs. Honeychurch cried. “Just because
they’re old and silly one’s expected to say ‘How sweet!’ I hate their
‘if’-ing and ‘but’-ing and ‘and’-ing. And poor Lucy—serve her
right—worn to a shadow.”

Mr. Beebe watched the shadow springing and shouting over the
tennis-court. Cecil was absent—one did not play bumble-puppy when he
was there.

“Well, if they are coming—No, Minnie, not Saturn.” Saturn was a
tennis-ball whose skin was partially unsewn. When in motion his orb was
encircled by a ring. “If they are coming, Sir Harry will let them move
in before the twenty-ninth, and he will cross out the clause about
whitewashing the ceilings, because it made them nervous, and put in the
fair wear and tear one.—That doesn’t count. I told you not Saturn.”

“Saturn’s all right for bumble-puppy,” cried Freddy, joining them.
“Minnie, don’t you listen to her.”

“Saturn doesn’t bounce.”

“Saturn bounces enough.”

“No, he doesn’t.”

“Well; he bounces better than the Beautiful White Devil.”

“Hush, dear,” said Mrs. Honeychurch.

“But look at Lucy—complaining of Saturn, and all the time’s got the
Beautiful White Devil in her hand, ready to plug it in. That’s right,
Minnie, go for her—get her over the shins with the racquet—get her over
the shins!”

Lucy fell, the Beautiful White Devil rolled from her hand.

Mr. Beebe picked it up, and said: “The name of this ball is Vittoria
Corombona, please.” But his correction passed unheeded.

Freddy possessed to a high degree the power of lashing little girls to
fury, and in half a minute he had transformed Minnie from a
well-mannered child into a howling wilderness. Up in the house Cecil
heard them, and, though he was full of entertaining news, he did not
come down to impart it, in case he got hurt. He was not a coward and
bore necessary pain as well as any man. But he hated the physical
violence of the young. How right it was! Sure enough it ended in a cry.

“I wish the Miss Alans could see this,” observed Mr. Beebe, just as
Lucy, who was nursing the injured Minnie, was in turn lifted off her
feet by her brother.

“Who are the Miss Alans?” Freddy panted.

“They have taken Cissie Villa.”

“That wasn’t the name—”

Here his foot slipped, and they all fell most agreeably on to the
grass. An interval elapses.

“Wasn’t what name?” asked Lucy, with her brother’s head in her lap.

“Alan wasn’t the name of the people Sir Harry’s let to.”

“Nonsense, Freddy! You know nothing about it.”

“Nonsense yourself! I’ve this minute seen him. He said to me: ‘Ahem!
Honeychurch,’”—Freddy was an indifferent mimic—“‘ahem! ahem! I have at
last procured really dee-sire-rebel tenants.’ I said, ‘ooray, old boy!’
and slapped him on the back.”

“Exactly. The Miss Alans?”

“Rather not. More like Anderson.”

“Oh, good gracious, there isn’t going to be another muddle!” Mrs.
Honeychurch exclaimed. “Do you notice, Lucy, I’m always right? I _said_
don’t interfere with Cissie Villa. I’m always right. I’m quite uneasy
at being always right so often.”

“It’s only another muddle of Freddy’s. Freddy doesn’t even know the
name of the people he pretends have taken it instead.”

“Yes, I do. I’ve got it. Emerson.”

“What name?”

“Emerson. I’ll bet you anything you like.”

“What a weathercock Sir Harry is,” said Lucy quietly. “I wish I had
never bothered over it at all.”

Then she lay on her back and gazed at the cloudless sky. Mr. Beebe,
whose opinion of her rose daily, whispered to his niece that _that_ was
the proper way to behave if any little thing went wrong.

Meanwhile the name of the new tenants had diverted Mrs. Honeychurch
from the contemplation of her own abilities.

“Emerson, Freddy? Do you know what Emersons they are?”

“I don’t know whether they’re any Emersons,” retorted Freddy, who was
democratic. Like his sister and like most young people, he was
naturally attracted by the idea of equality, and the undeniable fact
that there are different kinds of Emersons annoyed him beyond measure.

“I trust they are the right sort of person. All right, Lucy”—she was
sitting up again—“I see you looking down your nose and thinking your
mother’s a snob. But there is a right sort and a wrong sort, and it’s
affectation to pretend there isn’t.”

“Emerson’s a common enough name,” Lucy remarked.

She was gazing sideways. Seated on a promontory herself, she could see
the pine-clad promontories descending one beyond another into the
Weald. The further one descended the garden, the more glorious was this
lateral view.

“I was merely going to remark, Freddy, that I trusted they were no
relations of Emerson the philosopher, a most trying man. Pray, does
that satisfy you?”

“Oh, yes,” he grumbled. “And you will be satisfied, too, for they’re
friends of Cecil; so”—elaborate irony—“you and the other country
families will be able to call in perfect safety.”

“_Cecil?_” exclaimed Lucy.

“Don’t be rude, dear,” said his mother placidly. “Lucy, don’t screech.
It’s a new bad habit you’re getting into.”

“But has Cecil—”

“Friends of Cecil’s,” he repeated, “‘and so really dee-sire-rebel.
Ahem! Honeychurch, I have just telegraphed to them.’”

She got up from the grass.

It was hard on Lucy. Mr. Beebe sympathized with her very much. While
she believed that her snub about the Miss Alans came from Sir Harry
Otway, she had borne it like a good girl. She might well “screech” when
she heard that it came partly from her lover. Mr. Vyse was a
tease—something worse than a tease: he took a malicious pleasure in
thwarting people. The clergyman, knowing this, looked at Miss
Honeychurch with more than his usual kindness.

When she exclaimed, “But Cecil’s Emersons—they can’t possibly be the
same ones—there is that—” he did not consider that the exclamation was
strange, but saw in it an opportunity of diverting the conversation
while she recovered her composure. He diverted it as follows:

“The Emersons who were at Florence, do you mean? No, I don’t suppose it
will prove to be them. It is probably a long cry from them to friends
of Mr. Vyse’s. Oh, Mrs. Honeychurch, the oddest people! The queerest
people! For our part we liked them, didn’t we?” He appealed to Lucy.
“There was a great scene over some violets. They picked violets and
filled all the vases in the room of these very Miss Alans who have
failed to come to Cissie Villa. Poor little ladies! So shocked and so
pleased. It used to be one of Miss Catharine’s great stories. ‘My dear
sister loves flowers,’ it began. They found the whole room a mass of
blue—vases and jugs—and the story ends with ‘So ungentlemanly and yet
so beautiful.’ It is all very difficult. Yes, I always connect those
Florentine Emersons with violets.”

“Fiasco’s done you this time,” remarked Freddy, not seeing that his
sister’s face was very red. She could not recover herself. Mr. Beebe
saw it, and continued to divert the conversation.

“These particular Emersons consisted of a father and a son—the son a
goodly, if not a good young man; not a fool, I fancy, but very
immature—pessimism, et cetera. Our special joy was the father—such a
sentimental darling, and people declared he had murdered his wife.”

In his normal state Mr. Beebe would never have repeated such gossip,
but he was trying to shelter Lucy in her little trouble. He repeated
any rubbish that came into his head.

“Murdered his wife?” said Mrs. Honeychurch. “Lucy, don’t desert us—go
on playing bumble-puppy. Really, the Pension Bertolini must have been
the oddest place. That’s the second murderer I’ve heard of as being
there. Whatever was Charlotte doing to stop? By-the-by, we really must
ask Charlotte here some time.”

Mr. Beebe could recall no second murderer. He suggested that his
hostess was mistaken. At the hint of opposition she warmed. She was
perfectly sure that there had been a second tourist of whom the same
story had been told. The name escaped her. What was the name? Oh, what
was the name? She clasped her knees for the name. Something in
Thackeray. She struck her matronly forehead.

Lucy asked her brother whether Cecil was in.

“Oh, don’t go!” he cried, and tried to catch her by the ankles.

“I must go,” she said gravely. “Don’t be silly. You always overdo it
when you play.”

As she left them her mother’s shout of “Harris!” shivered the tranquil
air, and reminded her that she had told a lie and had never put it
right. Such a senseless lie, too, yet it shattered her nerves and made
her connect these Emersons, friends of Cecil’s, with a pair of
nondescript tourists. Hitherto truth had come to her naturally. She saw
that for the future she must be more vigilant, and be—absolutely
truthful? Well, at all events, she must not tell lies. She hurried up
the garden, still flushed with shame. A word from Cecil would soothe
her, she was sure.

“Cecil!”

“Hullo!” he called, and leant out of the smoking-room window. He seemed
in high spirits. “I was hoping you’d come. I heard you all
bear-gardening, but there’s better fun up here. I, even I, have won a
great victory for the Comic Muse. George Meredith’s right—the cause of
Comedy and the cause of Truth are really the same; and I, even I, have
found tenants for the distressful Cissie Villa. Don’t be angry! Don’t
be angry! You’ll forgive me when you hear it all.”

He looked very attractive when his face was bright, and he dispelled
her ridiculous forebodings at once.

“I have heard,” she said. “Freddy has told us. Naughty Cecil! I suppose
I must forgive you. Just think of all the trouble I took for nothing!
Certainly the Miss Alans are a little tiresome, and I’d rather have
nice friends of yours. But you oughtn’t to tease one so.”

“Friends of mine?” he laughed. “But, Lucy, the whole joke is to come!
Come here.” But she remained standing where she was. “Do you know where
I met these desirable tenants? In the National Gallery, when I was up
to see my mother last week.”

“What an odd place to meet people!” she said nervously. “I don’t quite
understand.”

“In the Umbrian Room. Absolute strangers. They were admiring Luca
Signorelli—of course, quite stupidly. However, we got talking, and they
refreshed me not a little. They had been to Italy.”

“But, Cecil—” proceeded hilariously.

“In the course of conversation they said that they wanted a country
cottage—the father to live there, the son to run down for week-ends. I
thought, ‘What a chance of scoring off Sir Harry!’ and I took their
address and a London reference, found they weren’t actual
blackguards—it was great sport—and wrote to him, making out—”

“Cecil! No, it’s not fair. I’ve probably met them before—”

He bore her down.

“Perfectly fair. Anything is fair that punishes a snob. That old man
will do the neighbourhood a world of good. Sir Harry is too disgusting
with his ‘decayed gentlewomen.’ I meant to read him a lesson some time.
No, Lucy, the classes ought to mix, and before long you’ll agree with
me. There ought to be intermarriage—all sorts of things. I believe in
democracy—”

“No, you don’t,” she snapped. “You don’t know what the word means.”

He stared at her, and felt again that she had failed to be
Leonardesque. “No, you don’t!”

Her face was inartistic—that of a peevish virago.

“It isn’t fair, Cecil. I blame you—I blame you very much indeed. You
had no business to undo my work about the Miss Alans, and make me look
ridiculous. You call it scoring off Sir Harry, but do you realize that
it is all at my expense? I consider it most disloyal of you.”

She left him.

“Temper!” he thought, raising his eyebrows.

No, it was worse than temper—snobbishness. As long as Lucy thought that
his own smart friends were supplanting the Miss Alans, she had not
minded. He perceived that these new tenants might be of value
educationally. He would tolerate the father and draw out the son, who
was silent. In the interests of the Comic Muse and of Truth, he would
bring them to Windy Corner.




Chapter XI
In Mrs. Vyse’s Well-Appointed Flat


The Comic Muse, though able to look after her own interests, did not
disdain the assistance of Mr. Vyse. His idea of bringing the Emersons
to Windy Corner struck her as decidedly good, and she carried through
the negotiations without a hitch. Sir Harry Otway signed the agreement,
met Mr. Emerson, who was duly disillusioned. The Miss Alans were duly
offended, and wrote a dignified letter to Lucy, whom they held
responsible for the failure. Mr. Beebe planned pleasant moments for the
new-comers, and told Mrs. Honeychurch that Freddy must call on them as
soon as they arrived. Indeed, so ample was the Muse’s equipment that
she permitted Mr. Harris, never a very robust criminal, to droop his
head, to be forgotten, and to die.

Lucy—to descend from bright heaven to earth, whereon there are shadows
because there are hills—Lucy was at first plunged into despair, but
settled after a little thought that it did not matter the very least.
Now that she was engaged, the Emersons would scarcely insult her and
were welcome into the neighbourhood. And Cecil was welcome to bring
whom he would into the neighbourhood. Therefore Cecil was welcome to
bring the Emersons into the neighbourhood. But, as I say, this took a
little thinking, and—so illogical are girls—the event remained rather
greater and rather more dreadful than it should have done. She was glad
that a visit to Mrs. Vyse now fell due; the tenants moved into Cissie
Villa while she was safe in the London flat.

“Cecil—Cecil darling,” she whispered the evening she arrived, and crept
into his arms.

Cecil, too, became demonstrative. He saw that the needful fire had been
kindled in Lucy. At last she longed for attention, as a woman should,
and looked up to him because he was a man.

“So you do love me, little thing?” he murmured.

“Oh, Cecil, I do, I do! I don’t know what I should do without you.”

Several days passed. Then she had a letter from Miss Bartlett. A
coolness had sprung up between the two cousins, and they had not
corresponded since they parted in August. The coolness dated from what
Charlotte would call “the flight to Rome,” and in Rome it had increased
amazingly. For the companion who is merely uncongenial in the mediaeval
world becomes exasperating in the classical. Charlotte, unselfish in
the Forum, would have tried a sweeter temper than Lucy’s, and once, in
the Baths of Caracalla, they had doubted whether they could continue
their tour. Lucy had said she would join the Vyses—Mrs. Vyse was an
acquaintance of her mother, so there was no impropriety in the plan and
Miss Bartlett had replied that she was quite used to being abandoned
suddenly. Finally nothing happened; but the coolness remained, and, for
Lucy, was even increased when she opened the letter and read as
follows. It had been forwarded from Windy Corner.

“TUNBRIDGE WELLS,
“_September_.


“DEAREST LUCIA,


“I have news of you at last! Miss Lavish has been bicycling in your
parts, but was not sure whether a call would be welcome. Puncturing her
tire near Summer Street, and it being mended while she sat very
woebegone in that pretty churchyard, she saw to her astonishment, a
door open opposite and the younger Emerson man come out. He said his
father had just taken the house. He _said_ he did not know that you
lived in the neighbourhood (?). He never suggested giving Eleanor a cup
of tea. Dear Lucy, I am much worried, and I advise you to make a clean
breast of his past behaviour to your mother, Freddy, and Mr. Vyse, who
will forbid him to enter the house, etc. That was a great misfortune,
and I dare say you have told them already. Mr. Vyse is so sensitive. I
remember how I used to get on his nerves at Rome. I am very sorry about
it all, and should not feel easy unless I warned you.


“Believe me,
“Your anxious and loving cousin,
“CHARLOTTE.”


Lucy was much annoyed, and replied as follows:

“BEAUCHAMP MANSIONS, S.W.




“DEAR CHARLOTTE,

“Many thanks for your warning. When Mr. Emerson forgot himself on the
mountain, you made me promise not to tell mother, because you said she
would blame you for not being always with me. I have kept that promise,
and cannot possibly tell her now. I have said both to her and Cecil
that I met the Emersons at Florence, and that they are respectable
people—which I _do_ think—and the reason that he offered Miss Lavish no
tea was probably that he had none himself. She should have tried at the
Rectory. I cannot begin making a fuss at this stage. You must see that
it would be too absurd. If the Emersons heard I had complained of them,
they would think themselves of importance, which is exactly what they
are not. I like the old father, and look forward to seeing him again.
As for the son, I am sorry for _him_ when we meet, rather than for
myself. They are known to Cecil, who is very well and spoke of you the
other day. We expect to be married in January.

“Miss Lavish cannot have told you much about me, for I am not at Windy
Corner at all, but here. Please do not put ‘Private’ outside your
envelope again. No one opens my letters.


“Yours affectionately,
“L. M. HONEYCHURCH.”


Secrecy has this disadvantage: we lose the sense of proportion; we
cannot tell whether our secret is important or not. Were Lucy and her
cousin closeted with a great thing which would destroy Cecil’s life if
he discovered it, or with a little thing which he would laugh at? Miss
Bartlett suggested the former. Perhaps she was right. It had become a
great thing now. Left to herself, Lucy would have told her mother and
her lover ingenuously, and it would have remained a little thing.
“Emerson, not Harris”; it was only that a few weeks ago. She tried to
tell Cecil even now when they were laughing about some beautiful lady
who had smitten his heart at school. But her body behaved so
ridiculously that she stopped.

She and her secret stayed ten days longer in the deserted Metropolis
visiting the scenes they were to know so well later on. It did her no
harm, Cecil thought, to learn the framework of society, while society
itself was absent on the golf-links or the moors. The weather was cool,
and it did her no harm. In spite of the season, Mrs. Vyse managed to
scrape together a dinner-party consisting entirely of the grandchildren
of famous people. The food was poor, but the talk had a witty weariness
that impressed the girl. One was tired of everything, it seemed. One
launched into enthusiasms only to collapse gracefully, and pick oneself
up amid sympathetic laughter. In this atmosphere the Pension Bertolini
and Windy Corner appeared equally crude, and Lucy saw that her London
career would estrange her a little from all that she had loved in the
past.

The grandchildren asked her to play the piano.

She played Schumann. “Now some Beethoven” called Cecil, when the
querulous beauty of the music had died. She shook her head and played
Schumann again. The melody rose, unprofitably magical. It broke; it was
resumed broken, not marching once from the cradle to the grave. The
sadness of the incomplete—the sadness that is often Life, but should
never be Art—throbbed in its disjected phrases, and made the nerves of
the audience throb. Not thus had she played on the little draped piano
at the Bertolini, and “Too much Schumann” was not the remark that Mr.
Beebe had passed to himself when she returned.

When the guests were gone, and Lucy had gone to bed, Mrs. Vyse paced up
and down the drawing-room, discussing her little party with her son.
Mrs. Vyse was a nice woman, but her personality, like many another’s,
had been swamped by London, for it needs a strong head to live among
many people. The too vast orb of her fate had crushed her; and she had
seen too many seasons, too many cities, too many men, for her
abilities, and even with Cecil she was mechanical, and behaved as if he
was not one son, but, so to speak, a filial crowd.

“Make Lucy one of us,” she said, looking round intelligently at the end
of each sentence, and straining her lips apart until she spoke again.
“Lucy is becoming wonderful—wonderful.”

“Her music always was wonderful.”

“Yes, but she is purging off the Honeychurch taint, most excellent
Honeychurches, but you know what I mean. She is not always quoting
servants, or asking one how the pudding is made.”

“Italy has done it.”

“Perhaps,” she murmured, thinking of the museum that represented Italy
to her. “It is just possible. Cecil, mind you marry her next January.
She is one of us already.”

“But her music!” he exclaimed. “The style of her! How she kept to
Schumann when, like an idiot, I wanted Beethoven. Schumann was right
for this evening. Schumann was the thing. Do you know, mother, I shall
have our children educated just like Lucy. Bring them up among honest
country folks for freshness, send them to Italy for subtlety, and
then—not till then—let them come to London. I don’t believe in these
London educations—” He broke off, remembering that he had had one
himself, and concluded, “At all events, not for women.”

“Make her one of us,” repeated Mrs. Vyse, and processed to bed.

As she was dozing off, a cry—the cry of nightmare—rang from Lucy’s
room. Lucy could ring for the maid if she liked but Mrs. Vyse thought
it kind to go herself. She found the girl sitting upright with her hand
on her cheek.

“I am so sorry, Mrs. Vyse—it is these dreams.”

“Bad dreams?”

“Just dreams.”

The elder lady smiled and kissed her, saying very distinctly: “You
should have heard us talking about you, dear. He admires you more than
ever. Dream of that.”

Lucy returned the kiss, still covering one cheek with her hand. Mrs.
Vyse recessed to bed. Cecil, whom the cry had not awoke, snored.
Darkness enveloped the flat.




Chapter XII
Twelfth Chapter


It was a Saturday afternoon, gay and brilliant after abundant rains,
and the spirit of youth dwelt in it, though the season was now autumn.
All that was gracious triumphed. As the motorcars passed through Summer
Street they raised only a little dust, and their stench was soon
dispersed by the wind and replaced by the scent of the wet birches or
of the pines. Mr. Beebe, at leisure for life’s amenities, leant over
his Rectory gate. Freddy leant by him, smoking a pendant pipe.

“Suppose we go and hinder those new people opposite for a little.”

“M’m.”

“They might amuse you.”

Freddy, whom his fellow-creatures never amused, suggested that the new
people might be feeling a bit busy, and so on, since they had only just
moved in.

“I suggested we should hinder them,” said Mr. Beebe. “They are worth
it.” Unlatching the gate, he sauntered over the triangular green to
Cissie Villa. “Hullo!” he cried, shouting in at the open door, through
which much squalor was visible.

A grave voice replied, “Hullo!”

“I’ve brought someone to see you.”

“I’ll be down in a minute.”

The passage was blocked by a wardrobe, which the removal men had failed
to carry up the stairs. Mr. Beebe edged round it with difficulty. The
sitting-room itself was blocked with books.

“Are these people great readers?” Freddy whispered. “Are they that
sort?”

“I fancy they know how to read—a rare accomplishment. What have they
got? Byron. Exactly. A Shropshire Lad. Never heard of it. The Way of
All Flesh. Never heard of it. Gibbon. Hullo! dear George reads German.
Um—um—Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and so we go on. Well, I suppose your
generation knows its own business, Honeychurch.”

“Mr. Beebe, look at that,” said Freddy in awestruck tones.

On the cornice of the wardrobe, the hand of an amateur had painted this
inscription: “Mistrust all enterprises that require new clothes.”

“I know. Isn’t it jolly? I like that. I’m certain that’s the old man’s
doing.”

“How very odd of him!”

“Surely you agree?”

But Freddy was his mother’s son and felt that one ought not to go on
spoiling the furniture.

“Pictures!” the clergyman continued, scrambling about the room.
“Giotto—they got that at Florence, I’ll be bound.”

“The same as Lucy’s got.”

“Oh, by-the-by, did Miss Honeychurch enjoy London?”

“She came back yesterday.”

“I suppose she had a good time?”

“Yes, very,” said Freddy, taking up a book. “She and Cecil are thicker
than ever.”

“That’s good hearing.”

“I wish I wasn’t such a fool, Mr. Beebe.”

Mr. Beebe ignored the remark.

“Lucy used to be nearly as stupid as I am, but it’ll be very different
now, mother thinks. She will read all kinds of books.”

“So will you.”

“Only medical books. Not books that you can talk about afterwards.
Cecil is teaching Lucy Italian, and he says her playing is wonderful.
There are all kinds of things in it that we have never noticed. Cecil
says—”

“What on earth are those people doing upstairs? Emerson—we think we’ll
come another time.”

George ran down-stairs and pushed them into the room without speaking.

“Let me introduce Mr. Honeychurch, a neighbour.”

Then Freddy hurled one of the thunderbolts of youth. Perhaps he was
shy, perhaps he was friendly, or perhaps he thought that George’s face
wanted washing. At all events he greeted him with, “How d’ye do? Come
and have a bathe.”

“Oh, all right,” said George, impassive.

Mr. Beebe was highly entertained.

“‘How d’ye do? how d’ye do? Come and have a bathe,’” he chuckled.
“That’s the best conversational opening I’ve ever heard. But I’m afraid
it will only act between men. Can you picture a lady who has been
introduced to another lady by a third lady opening civilities with ‘How
do you do? Come and have a bathe’? And yet you will tell me that the
sexes are equal.”

“I tell you that they shall be,” said Mr. Emerson, who had been slowly
descending the stairs. “Good afternoon, Mr. Beebe. I tell you they
shall be comrades, and George thinks the same.”

“We are to raise ladies to our level?” the clergyman inquired.

“The Garden of Eden,” pursued Mr. Emerson, still descending, “which you
place in the past, is really yet to come. We shall enter it when we no
longer despise our bodies.”

Mr. Beebe disclaimed placing the Garden of Eden anywhere.

“In this—not in other things—we men are ahead. We despise the body less
than women do. But not until we are comrades shall we enter the
garden.”

“I say, what about this bathe?” murmured Freddy, appalled at the mass
of philosophy that was approaching him.

“I believed in a return to Nature once. But how can we return to Nature
when we have never been with her? To-day, I believe that we must
discover Nature. After many conquests we shall attain simplicity. It is
our heritage.”

“Let me introduce Mr. Honeychurch, whose sister you will remember at
Florence.”

“How do you do? Very glad to see you, and that you are taking George
for a bathe. Very glad to hear that your sister is going to marry.
Marriage is a duty. I am sure that she will be happy, for we know Mr.
Vyse, too. He has been most kind. He met us by chance in the National
Gallery, and arranged everything about this delightful house. Though I
hope I have not vexed Sir Harry Otway. I have met so few Liberal
landowners, and I was anxious to compare his attitude towards the game
laws with the Conservative attitude. Ah, this wind! You do well to
bathe. Yours is a glorious country, Honeychurch!”

“Not a bit!” mumbled Freddy. “I must—that is to say, I have to—have the
pleasure of calling on you later on, my mother says, I hope.”

“_Call_, my lad? Who taught us that drawing-room twaddle? Call on your
grandmother! Listen to the wind among the pines! Yours is a glorious
country.”

Mr. Beebe came to the rescue.

“Mr. Emerson, he will call, I shall call; you or your son will return
our calls before ten days have elapsed. I trust that you have realized
about the ten days’ interval. It does not count that I helped you with
the stair-eyes yesterday. It does not count that they are going to
bathe this afternoon.”

“Yes, go and bathe, George. Why do you dawdle talking? Bring them back
to tea. Bring back some milk, cakes, honey. The change will do you
good. George has been working very hard at his office. I can’t believe
he’s well.”

George bowed his head, dusty and sombre, exhaling the peculiar smell of
one who has handled furniture.

“Do you really want this bathe?” Freddy asked him. “It is only a pond,
don’t you know. I dare say you are used to something better.”

“Yes—I have said ‘Yes’ already.”

Mr. Beebe felt bound to assist his young friend, and led the way out of
the house and into the pine-woods. How glorious it was! For a little
time the voice of old Mr. Emerson pursued them dispensing good wishes
and philosophy. It ceased, and they only heard the fair wind blowing
the bracken and the trees. Mr. Beebe, who could be silent, but who
could not bear silence, was compelled to chatter, since the expedition
looked like a failure, and neither of his companions would utter a
word. He spoke of Florence. George attended gravely, assenting or
dissenting with slight but determined gestures that were as
inexplicable as the motions of the tree-tops above their heads.

“And what a coincidence that you should meet Mr. Vyse! Did you realize
that you would find all the Pension Bertolini down here?”

“I did not. Miss Lavish told me.”

“When I was a young man, I always meant to write a ‘History of
Coincidence.’”

No enthusiasm.

“Though, as a matter of fact, coincidences are much rarer than we
suppose. For example, it isn’t purely coincidentally that you are here
now, when one comes to reflect.”

To his relief, George began to talk.

“It is. I have reflected. It is Fate. Everything is Fate. We are flung
together by Fate, drawn apart by Fate—flung together, drawn apart. The
twelve winds blow us—we settle nothing—”

“You have not reflected at all,” rapped the clergyman. “Let me give you
a useful tip, Emerson: attribute nothing to Fate. Don’t say, ‘I didn’t
do this,’ for you did it, ten to one. Now I’ll cross-question you.
Where did you first meet Miss Honeychurch and myself?”

“Italy.”

“And where did you meet Mr. Vyse, who is going to marry Miss
Honeychurch?”

“National Gallery.”

“Looking at Italian art. There you are, and yet you talk of coincidence
and Fate. You naturally seek out things Italian, and so do we and our
friends. This narrows the field immeasurably we meet again in it.”

“It is Fate that I am here,” persisted George. “But you can call it
Italy if it makes you less unhappy.”

Mr. Beebe slid away from such heavy treatment of the subject. But he
was infinitely tolerant of the young, and had no desire to snub George.

“And so for this and for other reasons my ‘History of Coincidence’ is
still to write.”

Silence.

Wishing to round off the episode, he added; “We are all so glad that
you have come.”

Silence.

“Here we are!” called Freddy.

“Oh, good!” exclaimed Mr. Beebe, mopping his brow.

“In there’s the pond. I wish it was bigger,” he added apologetically.

They climbed down a slippery bank of pine-needles. There lay the pond,
set in its little alp of green—only a pond, but large enough to contain
the human body, and pure enough to reflect the sky. On account of the
rains, the waters had flooded the surrounding grass, which showed like
a beautiful emerald path, tempting these feet towards the central pool.

“It’s distinctly successful, as ponds go,” said Mr. Beebe. “No
apologies are necessary for the pond.”

George sat down where the ground was dry, and drearily unlaced his
boots.

“Aren’t those masses of willow-herb splendid? I love willow-herb in
seed. What’s the name of this aromatic plant?”

No one knew, or seemed to care.

“These abrupt changes of vegetation—this little spongeous tract of
water plants, and on either side of it all the growths are tough or
brittle—heather, bracken, hurts, pines. Very charming, very charming.”

“Mr. Beebe, aren’t you bathing?” called Freddy, as he stripped himself.

Mr. Beebe thought he was not.

“Water’s wonderful!” cried Freddy, prancing in.

“Water’s water,” murmured George. Wetting his hair first—a sure sign of
apathy—he followed Freddy into the divine, as indifferent as if he were
a statue and the pond a pail of soapsuds. It was necessary to use his
muscles. It was necessary to keep clean. Mr. Beebe watched them, and
watched the seeds of the willow-herb dance chorically above their
heads.

“Apooshoo, apooshoo, apooshoo,” went Freddy, swimming for two strokes
in either direction, and then becoming involved in reeds or mud.

“Is it worth it?” asked the other, Michelangelesque on the flooded
margin.

The bank broke away, and he fell into the pool before he had weighed
the question properly.

“Hee-poof—I’ve swallowed a pollywog, Mr. Beebe, water’s wonderful,
water’s simply ripping.”

“Water’s not so bad,” said George, reappearing from his plunge, and
sputtering at the sun.

“Water’s wonderful. Mr. Beebe, do.”

“Apooshoo, kouf.”

Mr. Beebe, who was hot, and who always acquiesced where possible,
looked around him. He could detect no parishioners except the
pine-trees, rising up steeply on all sides, and gesturing to each other
against the blue. How glorious it was! The world of motor-cars and
rural Deans receded inimitably. Water, sky, evergreens, a wind—these
things not even the seasons can touch, and surely they lie beyond the
intrusion of man?

“I may as well wash too”; and soon his garments made a third little
pile on the sward, and he too asserted the wonder of the water.

It was ordinary water, nor was there very much of it, and, as Freddy
said, it reminded one of swimming in a salad. The three gentlemen
rotated in the pool breast high, after the fashion of the nymphs in
Götterdämmerung. But either because the rains had given a freshness or
because the sun was shedding a most glorious heat, or because two of
the gentlemen were young in years and the third young in spirit—for
some reason or other a change came over them, and they forgot Italy and
Botany and Fate. They began to play. Mr. Beebe and Freddy splashed each
other. A little deferentially, they splashed George. He was quiet: they
feared they had offended him. Then all the forces of youth burst out.
He smiled, flung himself at them, splashed them, ducked them, kicked
them, muddied them, and drove them out of the pool.

“Race you round it, then,” cried Freddy, and they raced in the
sunshine, and George took a short cut and dirtied his shins, and had to
bathe a second time. Then Mr. Beebe consented to run—a memorable sight.

They ran to get dry, they bathed to get cool, they played at being
Indians in the willow-herbs and in the bracken, they bathed to get
clean. And all the time three little bundles lay discreetly on the
sward, proclaiming:

“No. We are what matters. Without us shall no enterprise begin. To us
shall all flesh turn in the end.”

“A try! A try!” yelled Freddy, snatching up George’s bundle and placing
it beside an imaginary goal-post.

“Socker rules,” George retorted, scattering Freddy’s bundle with a
kick.

“Goal!”

“Goal!”

“Pass!”

“Take care my watch!” cried Mr. Beebe.

Clothes flew in all directions.

“Take care my hat! No, that’s enough, Freddy. Dress now. No, I say!”

But the two young men were delirious. Away they twinkled into the
trees, Freddy with a clerical waistcoat under his arm, George with a
wide-awake hat on his dripping hair.

“That’ll do!” shouted Mr. Beebe, remembering that after all he was in
his own parish. Then his voice changed as if every pine-tree was a
Rural Dean. “Hi! Steady on! I see people coming you fellows!”

Yells, and widening circles over the dappled earth.

“Hi! hi! _Ladies!_”

Neither George nor Freddy was truly refined. Still, they did not hear
Mr. Beebe’s last warning or they would have avoided Mrs. Honeychurch,
Cecil, and Lucy, who were walking down to call on old Mrs. Butterworth.
Freddy dropped the waistcoat at their feet, and dashed into some
bracken. George whooped in their faces, turned and scudded away down
the path to the pond, still clad in Mr. Beebe’s hat.

“Gracious alive!” cried Mrs. Honeychurch. “Whoever were those
unfortunate people? Oh, dears, look away! And poor Mr. Beebe, too!
Whatever has happened?”

“Come this way immediately,” commanded Cecil, who always felt that he
must lead women, though he knew not whither, and protect them, though
he knew not against what. He led them now towards the bracken where
Freddy sat concealed.

“Oh, poor Mr. Beebe! Was that his waistcoat we left in the path? Cecil,
Mr. Beebe’s waistcoat—”

No business of ours, said Cecil, glancing at Lucy, who was all parasol
and evidently “minded.”

“I fancy Mr. Beebe jumped back into the pond.”

“This way, please, Mrs. Honeychurch, this way.”

They followed him up the bank attempting the tense yet nonchalant
expression that is suitable for ladies on such occasions.

“Well, _I_ can’t help it,” said a voice close ahead, and Freddy reared
a freckled face and a pair of snowy shoulders out of the fronds. “I
can’t be trodden on, can I?”

“Good gracious me, dear; so it’s you! What miserable management! Why
not have a comfortable bath at home, with hot and cold laid on?”

“Look here, mother, a fellow must wash, and a fellow’s got to dry, and
if another fellow—”

“Dear, no doubt you’re right as usual, but you are in no position to
argue. Come, Lucy.” They turned. “Oh, look—don’t look! Oh, poor Mr.
Beebe! How unfortunate again—”

For Mr. Beebe was just crawling out of the pond, on whose surface
garments of an intimate nature did float; while George, the world-weary
George, shouted to Freddy that he had hooked a fish.

“And me, I’ve swallowed one,” answered he of the bracken. “I’ve
swallowed a pollywog. It wriggleth in my tummy. I shall die—Emerson you
beast, you’ve got on my bags.”

“Hush, dears,” said Mrs. Honeychurch, who found it impossible to remain
shocked. “And do be sure you dry yourselves thoroughly first. All these
colds come of not drying thoroughly.”

“Mother, do come away,” said Lucy. “Oh for goodness’ sake, do come.”

“Hullo!” cried George, so that again the ladies stopped.

He regarded himself as dressed. Barefoot, bare-chested, radiant and
personable against the shadowy woods, he called:

“Hullo, Miss Honeychurch! Hullo!”

“Bow, Lucy; better bow. Whoever is it? I shall bow.”

Miss Honeychurch bowed.

That evening and all that night the water ran away. On the morrow the
pool had shrunk to its old size and lost its glory. It had been a call
to the blood and to the relaxed will, a passing benediction whose
influence did not pass, a holiness, a spell, a momentary chalice for
youth.




Chapter XIII
How Miss Bartlett’s Boiler Was So Tiresome


How often had Lucy rehearsed this bow, this interview! But she had
always rehearsed them indoors, and with certain accessories, which
surely we have a right to assume. Who could foretell that she and
George would meet in the rout of a civilization, amidst an army of
coats and collars and boots that lay wounded over the sunlit earth? She
had imagined a young Mr. Emerson, who might be shy or morbid or
indifferent or furtively impudent. She was prepared for all of these.
But she had never imagined one who would be happy and greet her with
the shout of the morning star.

Indoors herself, partaking of tea with old Mrs. Butterworth, she
reflected that it is impossible to foretell the future with any degree
of accuracy, that it is impossible to rehearse life. A fault in the
scenery, a face in the audience, an irruption of the audience on to the
stage, and all our carefully planned gestures mean nothing, or mean too
much. “I will bow,” she had thought. “I will not shake hands with him.
That will be just the proper thing.” She had bowed—but to whom? To
gods, to heroes, to the nonsense of school-girls! She had bowed across
the rubbish that cumbers the world.

So ran her thoughts, while her faculties were busy with Cecil. It was
another of those dreadful engagement calls. Mrs. Butterworth had wanted
to see him, and he did not want to be seen. He did not want to hear
about hydrangeas, why they change their colour at the seaside. He did
not want to join the C. O. S. When cross he was always elaborate, and
made long, clever answers where “Yes” or “No” would have done. Lucy
soothed him and tinkered at the conversation in a way that promised
well for their married peace. No one is perfect, and surely it is wiser
to discover the imperfections before wedlock. Miss Bartlett, indeed,
though not in word, had taught the girl that this our life contains
nothing satisfactory. Lucy, though she disliked the teacher, regarded
the teaching as profound, and applied it to her lover.

“Lucy,” said her mother, when they got home, “is anything the matter
with Cecil?”

The question was ominous; up till now Mrs. Honeychurch had behaved with
charity and restraint.

“No, I don’t think so, mother; Cecil’s all right.”

“Perhaps he’s tired.”

Lucy compromised: perhaps Cecil was a little tired.

“Because otherwise”—she pulled out her bonnet-pins with gathering
displeasure—“because otherwise I cannot account for him.”

“I do think Mrs. Butterworth is rather tiresome, if you mean that.”

“Cecil has told you to think so. You were devoted to her as a little
girl, and nothing will describe her goodness to you through the typhoid
fever. No—it is just the same thing everywhere.”

“Let me just put your bonnet away, may I?”

“Surely he could answer her civilly for one half-hour?”

“Cecil has a very high standard for people,” faltered Lucy, seeing
trouble ahead. “It’s part of his ideals—it is really that that makes
him sometimes seem—”

“Oh, rubbish! If high ideals make a young man rude, the sooner he gets
rid of them the better,” said Mrs. Honeychurch, handing her the bonnet.

“Now, mother! I’ve seen you cross with Mrs. Butterworth yourself!”

“Not in that way. At times I could wring her neck. But not in that way.
No. It is the same with Cecil all over.”

“By-the-by—I never told you. I had a letter from Charlotte while I was
away in London.”

This attempt to divert the conversation was too puerile, and Mrs.
Honeychurch resented it.

“Since Cecil came back from London, nothing appears to please him.
Whenever I speak he winces;—I see him, Lucy; it is useless to
contradict me. No doubt I am neither artistic nor literary nor
intellectual nor musical, but I cannot help the drawing-room furniture;
your father bought it and we must put up with it, will Cecil kindly
remember.”

“I—I see what you mean, and certainly Cecil oughtn’t to. But he does
not mean to be uncivil—he once explained—it is the _things_ that upset
him—he is easily upset by ugly things—he is not uncivil to _people_.”

“Is it a thing or a person when Freddy sings?”

“You can’t expect a really musical person to enjoy comic songs as we
do.”

“Then why didn’t he leave the room? Why sit wriggling and sneering and
spoiling everyone’s pleasure?”

“We mustn’t be unjust to people,” faltered Lucy. Something had
enfeebled her, and the case for Cecil, which she had mastered so
perfectly in London, would not come forth in an effective form. The two
civilizations had clashed—Cecil hinted that they might—and she was
dazzled and bewildered, as though the radiance that lies behind all
civilization had blinded her eyes. Good taste and bad taste were only
catchwords, garments of diverse cut; and music itself dissolved to a
whisper through pine-trees, where the song is not distinguishable from
the comic song.

She remained in much embarrassment, while Mrs. Honeychurch changed her
frock for dinner; and every now and then she said a word, and made
things no better. There was no concealing the fact, Cecil had meant to
be supercilious, and he had succeeded. And Lucy—she knew not why—wished
that the trouble could have come at any other time.

“Go and dress, dear; you’ll be late.”

“All right, mother—”

“Don’t say ‘All right’ and stop. Go.”

She obeyed, but loitered disconsolately at the landing window. It faced
north, so there was little view, and no view of the sky. Now, as in the
winter, the pine-trees hung close to her eyes. One connected the
landing window with depression. No definite problem menaced her, but
she sighed to herself, “Oh, dear, what shall I do, what shall I do?” It
seemed to her that everyone else was behaving very badly. And she ought
not to have mentioned Miss Bartlett’s letter. She must be more careful;
her mother was rather inquisitive, and might have asked what it was
about. Oh, dear, what should she do?—and then Freddy came bounding
upstairs, and joined the ranks of the ill-behaved.

“I say, those are topping people.”

“My dear baby, how tiresome you’ve been! You have no business to take
them bathing in the Sacred Lake; it’s much too public. It was all right
for you but most awkward for everyone else. Do be more careful. You
forget the place is growing half suburban.”

“I say, is anything on to-morrow week?”

“Not that I know of.”

“Then I want to ask the Emersons up to Sunday tennis.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t do that, Freddy, I wouldn’t do that with all this
muddle.”

“What’s wrong with the court? They won’t mind a bump or two, and I’ve
ordered new balls.”

“I meant _it’s_ better not. I really mean it.”

He seized her by the elbows and humorously danced her up and down the
passage. She pretended not to mind, but she could have screamed with
temper. Cecil glanced at them as he proceeded to his toilet and they
impeded Mary with her brood of hot-water cans. Then Mrs. Honeychurch
opened her door and said: “Lucy, what a noise you’re making! I have
something to say to you. Did you say you had had a letter from
Charlotte?” and Freddy ran away.

“Yes. I really can’t stop. I must dress too.”

“How’s Charlotte?”

“All right.”

“Lucy!”

The unfortunate girl returned.

“You’ve a bad habit of hurrying away in the middle of one’s sentences.
Did Charlotte mention her boiler?”

“Her _what?_”

“Don’t you remember that her boiler was to be had out in October, and
her bath cistern cleaned out, and all kinds of terrible to-doings?”

“I can’t remember all Charlotte’s worries,” said Lucy bitterly. “I
shall have enough of my own, now that you are not pleased with Cecil.”

Mrs. Honeychurch might have flamed out. She did not. She said: “Come
here, old lady—thank you for putting away my bonnet—kiss me.” And,
though nothing is perfect, Lucy felt for the moment that her mother and
Windy Corner and the Weald in the declining sun were perfect.

So the grittiness went out of life. It generally did at Windy Corner.
At the last minute, when the social machine was clogged hopelessly, one
member or other of the family poured in a drop of oil. Cecil despised
their methods—perhaps rightly. At all events, they were not his own.

Dinner was at half-past seven. Freddy gabbled the grace, and they drew
up their heavy chairs and fell to. Fortunately, the men were hungry.
Nothing untoward occurred until the pudding. Then Freddy said:

“Lucy, what’s Emerson like?”

“I saw him in Florence,” said Lucy, hoping that this would pass for a
reply.

“Is he the clever sort, or is he a decent chap?”

“Ask Cecil; it is Cecil who brought him here.”

“He is the clever sort, like myself,” said Cecil.

Freddy looked at him doubtfully.

“How well did you know them at the Bertolini?” asked Mrs. Honeychurch.

“Oh, very slightly. I mean, Charlotte knew them even less than I did.”

“Oh, that reminds me—you never told me what Charlotte said in her
letter.”

“One thing and another,” said Lucy, wondering whether she would get
through the meal without a lie. “Among other things, that an awful
friend of hers had been bicycling through Summer Street, wondered if
she’d come up and see us, and mercifully didn’t.”

“Lucy, I do call the way you talk unkind.”

“She was a novelist,” said Lucy craftily. The remark was a happy one,
for nothing roused Mrs. Honeychurch so much as literature in the hands
of females. She would abandon every topic to inveigh against those
women who (instead of minding their houses and their children) seek
notoriety by print. Her attitude was: “If books must be written, let
them be written by men”; and she developed it at great length, while
Cecil yawned and Freddy played at “This year, next year, now, never,”
with his plum-stones, and Lucy artfully fed the flames of her mother’s
wrath. But soon the conflagration died down, and the ghosts began to
gather in the darkness. There were too many ghosts about. The original
ghost—that touch of lips on her cheek—had surely been laid long ago; it
could be nothing to her that a man had kissed her on a mountain once.
But it had begotten a spectral family—Mr. Harris, Miss Bartlett’s
letter, Mr. Beebe’s memories of violets—and one or other of these was
bound to haunt her before Cecil’s very eyes. It was Miss Bartlett who
returned now, and with appalling vividness.

“I have been thinking, Lucy, of that letter of Charlotte’s. How is
she?”

“I tore the thing up.”

“Didn’t she say how she was? How does she sound? Cheerful?”

“Oh, yes I suppose so—no—not very cheerful, I suppose.”

“Then, depend upon it, it _is_ the boiler. I know myself how water
preys upon one’s mind. I would rather anything else—even a misfortune
with the meat.”

Cecil laid his hand over his eyes.

“So would I,” asserted Freddy, backing his mother up—backing up the
spirit of her remark rather than the substance.

“And I have been thinking,” she added rather nervously, “surely we
could squeeze Charlotte in here next week, and give her a nice holiday
while the plumbers at Tunbridge Wells finish. I have not seen poor
Charlotte for so long.”

It was more than her nerves could stand. And she could not protest
violently after her mother’s goodness to her upstairs.

“Mother, no!” she pleaded. “It’s impossible. We can’t have Charlotte on
the top of the other things; we’re squeezed to death as it is. Freddy’s
got a friend coming Tuesday, there’s Cecil, and you’ve promised to take
in Minnie Beebe because of the diphtheria scare. It simply can’t be
done.”

“Nonsense! It can.”

“If Minnie sleeps in the bath. Not otherwise.”

“Minnie can sleep with you.”

“I won’t have her.”

“Then, if you’re so selfish, Mr. Floyd must share a room with Freddy.”

“Miss Bartlett, Miss Bartlett, Miss Bartlett,” moaned Cecil, again
laying his hand over his eyes.

“It’s impossible,” repeated Lucy. “I don’t want to make difficulties,
but it really isn’t fair on the maids to fill up the house so.”

Alas!

“The truth is, dear, you don’t like Charlotte.”

“No, I don’t. And no more does Cecil. She gets on our nerves. You
haven’t seen her lately, and don’t realize how tiresome she can be,
though so good. So please, mother, don’t worry us this last summer; but
spoil us by not asking her to come.”

“Hear, hear!” said Cecil.

Mrs. Honeychurch, with more gravity than usual, and with more feeling
than she usually permitted herself, replied: “This isn’t very kind of
you two. You have each other and all these woods to walk in, so full of
beautiful things; and poor Charlotte has only the water turned off and
plumbers. You are young, dears, and however clever young people are,
and however many books they read, they will never guess what it feels
like to grow old.”

Cecil crumbled his bread.

“I must say Cousin Charlotte was very kind to me that year I called on
my bike,” put in Freddy. “She thanked me for coming till I felt like
such a fool, and fussed round no end to get an egg boiled for my tea
just right.”

“I know, dear. She is kind to everyone, and yet Lucy makes this
difficulty when we try to give her some little return.”

But Lucy hardened her heart. It was no good being kind to Miss
Bartlett. She had tried herself too often and too recently. One might
lay up treasure in heaven by the attempt, but one enriched neither Miss
Bartlett nor any one else upon earth. She was reduced to saying: “I
can’t help it, mother. I don’t like Charlotte. I admit it’s horrid of
me.”

“From your own account, you told her as much.”

“Well, she would leave Florence so stupidly. She flurried—”

The ghosts were returning; they filled Italy, they were even usurping
the places she had known as a child. The Sacred Lake would never be the
same again, and, on Sunday week, something would even happen to Windy
Corner. How would she fight against ghosts? For a moment the visible
world faded away, and memories and emotions alone seemed real.

“I suppose Miss Bartlett must come, since she boils eggs so well,” said
Cecil, who was in rather a happier frame of mind, thanks to the
admirable cooking.

“I didn’t mean the egg was _well_ boiled,” corrected Freddy, “because
in point of fact she forgot to take it off, and as a matter of fact I
don’t care for eggs. I only meant how jolly kind she seemed.”

Cecil frowned again. Oh, these Honeychurches! Eggs, boilers,
hydrangeas, maids—of such were their lives compact. “May me and Lucy
get down from our chairs?” he asked, with scarcely veiled insolence.
“We don’t want no dessert.”




Chapter XIV
How Lucy Faced the External Situation Bravely


Of course Miss Bartlett accepted. And, equally of course, she felt sure
that she would prove a nuisance, and begged to be given an inferior
spare room—something with no view, anything. Her love to Lucy. And,
equally of course, George Emerson could come to tennis on the Sunday
week.

Lucy faced the situation bravely, though, like most of us, she only
faced the situation that encompassed her. She never gazed inwards. If
at times strange images rose from the depths, she put them down to
nerves. When Cecil brought the Emersons to Summer Street, it had upset
her nerves. Charlotte would burnish up past foolishness, and this might
upset her nerves. She was nervous at night. When she talked to
George—they met again almost immediately at the Rectory—his voice moved
her deeply, and she wished to remain near him. How dreadful if she
really wished to remain near him! Of course, the wish was due to
nerves, which love to play such perverse tricks upon us. Once she had
suffered from “things that came out of nothing and meant she didn’t
know what.” Now Cecil had explained psychology to her one wet
afternoon, and all the troubles of youth in an unknown world could be
dismissed.

It is obvious enough for the reader to conclude, “She loves young
Emerson.” A reader in Lucy’s place would not find it obvious. Life is
easy to chronicle, but bewildering to practice, and we welcome “nerves”
or any other shibboleth that will cloak our personal desire. She loved
Cecil; George made her nervous; will the reader explain to her that the
phrases should have been reversed?

But the external situation—she will face that bravely.

The meeting at the Rectory had passed off well enough. Standing between
Mr. Beebe and Cecil, she had made a few temperate allusions to Italy,
and George had replied. She was anxious to show that she was not shy,
and was glad that he did not seem shy either.

“A nice fellow,” said Mr. Beebe afterwards “He will work off his
crudities in time. I rather mistrust young men who slip into life
gracefully.”

Lucy said, “He seems in better spirits. He laughs more.”

“Yes,” replied the clergyman. “He is waking up.”

That was all. But, as the week wore on, more of her defences fell, and
she entertained an image that had physical beauty. In spite of the
clearest directions, Miss Bartlett contrived to bungle her arrival. She
was due at the South-Eastern station at Dorking, whither Mrs.
Honeychurch drove to meet her. She arrived at the London and Brighton
station, and had to hire a cab up. No one was at home except Freddy and
his friend, who had to stop their tennis and to entertain her for a
solid hour. Cecil and Lucy turned up at four o’clock, and these, with
little Minnie Beebe, made a somewhat lugubrious sextette upon the upper
lawn for tea.

“I shall never forgive myself,” said Miss Bartlett, who kept on rising
from her seat, and had to be begged by the united company to remain. “I
have upset everything. Bursting in on young people! But I insist on
paying for my cab up. Grant that, at any rate.”

“Our visitors never do such dreadful things,” said Lucy, while her
brother, in whose memory the boiled egg had already grown
unsubstantial, exclaimed in irritable tones: “Just what I’ve been
trying to convince Cousin Charlotte of, Lucy, for the last half hour.”

“I do not feel myself an ordinary visitor,” said Miss Bartlett, and
looked at her frayed glove.

“All right, if you’d really rather. Five shillings, and I gave a bob to
the driver.”

Miss Bartlett looked in her purse. Only sovereigns and pennies. Could
any one give her change? Freddy had half a quid and his friend had four
half-crowns. Miss Bartlett accepted their moneys and then said: “But
who am I to give the sovereign to?”

“Let’s leave it all till mother comes back,” suggested Lucy.

“No, dear; your mother may take quite a long drive now that she is not
hampered with me. We all have our little foibles, and mine is the
prompt settling of accounts.”

Here Freddy’s friend, Mr. Floyd, made the one remark of his that need
be quoted: he offered to toss Freddy for Miss Bartlett’s quid. A
solution seemed in sight, and even Cecil, who had been ostentatiously
drinking his tea at the view, felt the eternal attraction of Chance,
and turned round.

But this did not do, either.

“Please—please—I know I am a sad spoil-sport, but it would make me
wretched. I should practically be robbing the one who lost.”

“Freddy owes me fifteen shillings,” interposed Cecil. “So it will work
out right if you give the pound to me.”

“Fifteen shillings,” said Miss Bartlett dubiously. “How is that, Mr.
Vyse?”

“Because, don’t you see, Freddy paid your cab. Give me the pound, and
we shall avoid this deplorable gambling.”

Miss Bartlett, who was poor at figures, became bewildered and rendered
up the sovereign, amidst the suppressed gurgles of the other youths.
For a moment Cecil was happy. He was playing at nonsense among his
peers. Then he glanced at Lucy, in whose face petty anxieties had
marred the smiles. In January he would rescue his Leonardo from this
stupefying twaddle.

“But I don’t see that!” exclaimed Minnie Beebe who had narrowly watched
the iniquitous transaction. “I don’t see why Mr. Vyse is to have the
quid.”

“Because of the fifteen shillings and the five,” they said solemnly.
“Fifteen shillings and five shillings make one pound, you see.”

“But I don’t see—”

They tried to stifle her with cake.

“No, thank you. I’m done. I don’t see why—Freddy, don’t poke me. Miss
Honeychurch, your brother’s hurting me. Ow! What about Mr. Floyd’s ten
shillings? Ow! No, I don’t see and I never shall see why Miss
What’s-her-name shouldn’t pay that bob for the driver.”

“I had forgotten the driver,” said Miss Bartlett, reddening. “Thank
you, dear, for reminding me. A shilling was it? Can any one give me
change for half a crown?”

“I’ll get it,” said the young hostess, rising with decision.

“Cecil, give me that sovereign. No, give me up that sovereign. I’ll get
Euphemia to change it, and we’ll start the whole thing again from the
beginning.”

“Lucy—Lucy—what a nuisance I am!” protested Miss Bartlett, and followed
her across the lawn. Lucy tripped ahead, simulating hilarity. When they
were out of earshot Miss Bartlett stopped her wails and said quite
briskly: “Have you told him about him yet?”

“No, I haven’t,” replied Lucy, and then could have bitten her tongue
for understanding so quickly what her cousin meant. “Let me see—a
sovereign’s worth of silver.”

She escaped into the kitchen. Miss Bartlett’s sudden transitions were
too uncanny. It sometimes seemed as if she planned every word she spoke
or caused to be spoken; as if all this worry about cabs and change had
been a ruse to surprise the soul.

“No, I haven’t told Cecil or any one,” she remarked, when she returned.
“I promised you I shouldn’t. Here is your money—all shillings, except
two half-crowns. Would you count it? You can settle your debt nicely
now.”

Miss Bartlett was in the drawing-room, gazing at the photograph of St.
John ascending, which had been framed.

“How dreadful!” she murmured, “how more than dreadful, if Mr. Vyse
should come to hear of it from some other source.”

“Oh, no, Charlotte,” said the girl, entering the battle. “George
Emerson is all right, and what other source is there?”

Miss Bartlett considered. “For instance, the driver. I saw him looking
through the bushes at you, remember he had a violet between his teeth.”

Lucy shuddered a little. “We shall get the silly affair on our nerves
if we aren’t careful. How could a Florentine cab-driver ever get hold
of Cecil?”

“We must think of every possibility.”

“Oh, it’s all right.”

“Or perhaps old Mr. Emerson knows. In fact, he is certain to know.”

“I don’t care if he does. I was grateful to you for your letter, but
even if the news does get round, I think I can trust Cecil to laugh at
it.”

“To contradict it?”

“No, to laugh at it.” But she knew in her heart that she could not
trust him, for he desired her untouched.

“Very well, dear, you know best. Perhaps gentlemen are different to
what they were when I was young. Ladies are certainly different.”

“Now, Charlotte!” She struck at her playfully. “You kind, anxious
thing. What _would_ you have me do? First you say ‘Don’t tell’; and
then you say, ‘Tell’. Which is it to be? Quick!”

Miss Bartlett sighed “I am no match for you in conversation, dearest. I
blush when I think how I interfered at Florence, and you so well able
to look after yourself, and so much cleverer in all ways than I am. You
will never forgive me.”

“Shall we go out, then. They will smash all the china if we don’t.”

For the air rang with the shrieks of Minnie, who was being scalped with
a teaspoon.

“Dear, one moment—we may not have this chance for a chat again. Have
you seen the young one yet?”

“Yes, I have.”

“What happened?”

“We met at the Rectory.”

“What line is he taking up?”

“No line. He talked about Italy, like any other person. It is really
all right. What advantage would he get from being a cad, to put it
bluntly? I do wish I could make you see it my way. He really won’t be
any nuisance, Charlotte.”

“Once a cad, always a cad. That is my poor opinion.”

Lucy paused. “Cecil said one day—and I thought it so profound—that
there are two kinds of cads—the conscious and the subconscious.” She
paused again, to be sure of doing justice to Cecil’s profundity.
Through the window she saw Cecil himself, turning over the pages of a
novel. It was a new one from Smith’s library. Her mother must have
returned from the station.

“Once a cad, always a cad,” droned Miss Bartlett.

“What I mean by subconscious is that Emerson lost his head. I fell into
all those violets, and he was silly and surprised. I don’t think we
ought to blame him very much. It makes such a difference when you see a
person with beautiful things behind him unexpectedly. It really does;
it makes an enormous difference, and he lost his head: he doesn’t
admire me, or any of that nonsense, one straw. Freddy rather likes him,
and has asked him up here on Sunday, so you can judge for yourself. He
has improved; he doesn’t always look as if he’s going to burst into
tears. He is a clerk in the General Manager’s office at one of the big
railways—not a porter! and runs down to his father for week-ends. Papa
was to do with journalism, but is rheumatic and has retired. There! Now
for the garden.” She took hold of her guest by the arm. “Suppose we
don’t talk about this silly Italian business any more. We want you to
have a nice restful visit at Windy Corner, with no worriting.”

Lucy thought this rather a good speech. The reader may have detected an
unfortunate slip in it. Whether Miss Bartlett detected the slip one
cannot say, for it is impossible to penetrate into the minds of elderly
people. She might have spoken further, but they were interrupted by the
entrance of her hostess. Explanations took place, and in the midst of
them Lucy escaped, the images throbbing a little more vividly in her
brain.




Chapter XV
The Disaster Within


The Sunday after Miss Bartlett’s arrival was a glorious day, like most
of the days of that year. In the Weald, autumn approached, breaking up
the green monotony of summer, touching the parks with the grey bloom of
mist, the beech-trees with russet, the oak-trees with gold. Up on the
heights, battalions of black pines witnessed the change, themselves
unchangeable. Either country was spanned by a cloudless sky, and in
either arose the tinkle of church bells.

The garden of Windy Corners was deserted except for a red book, which
lay sunning itself upon the gravel path. From the house came incoherent
sounds, as of females preparing for worship. “The men say they won’t
go”—“Well, I don’t blame them”—Minnie says, “need she go?”—“Tell her,
no nonsense”—“Anne! Mary! Hook me behind!”—“Dearest Lucia, may I
trespass upon you for a pin?” For Miss Bartlett had announced that she
at all events was one for church.

The sun rose higher on its journey, guided, not by Phaethon, but by
Apollo, competent, unswerving, divine. Its rays fell on the ladies
whenever they advanced towards the bedroom windows; on Mr. Beebe down
at Summer Street as he smiled over a letter from Miss Catharine Alan;
on George Emerson cleaning his father’s boots; and lastly, to complete
the catalogue of memorable things, on the red book mentioned
previously. The ladies move, Mr. Beebe moves, George moves, and
movement may engender shadow. But this book lies motionless, to be
caressed all the morning by the sun and to raise its covers slightly,
as though acknowledging the caress.

Presently Lucy steps out of the drawing-room window. Her new cerise
dress has been a failure, and makes her look tawdry and wan. At her
throat is a garnet brooch, on her finger a ring set with rubies—an
engagement ring. Her eyes are bent to the Weald. She frowns a
little—not in anger, but as a brave child frowns when he is trying not
to cry. In all that expanse no human eye is looking at her, and she may
frown unrebuked and measure the spaces that yet survive between Apollo
and the western hills.

“Lucy! Lucy! What’s that book? Who’s been taking a book out of the
shelf and leaving it about to spoil?”

“It’s only the library book that Cecil’s been reading.”

“But pick it up, and don’t stand idling there like a flamingo.”

Lucy picked up the book and glanced at the title listlessly, Under a
Loggia. She no longer read novels herself, devoting all her spare time
to solid literature in the hope of catching Cecil up. It was dreadful
how little she knew, and even when she thought she knew a thing, like
the Italian painters, she found she had forgotten it. Only this morning
she had confused Francesco Francia with Piero della Francesca, and
Cecil had said, “What! you aren’t forgetting your Italy already?” And
this too had lent anxiety to her eyes when she saluted the dear view
and the dear garden in the foreground, and above them, scarcely
conceivable elsewhere, the dear sun.

“Lucy—have you a sixpence for Minnie and a shilling for yourself?”

She hastened in to her mother, who was rapidly working herself into a
Sunday fluster.

“It’s a special collection—I forget what for. I do beg, no vulgar
clinking in the plate with halfpennies; see that Minnie has a nice
bright sixpence. Where is the child? Minnie! That book’s all warped.
(Gracious, how plain you look!) Put it under the Atlas to press.
Minnie!”

“Oh, Mrs. Honeychurch—” from the upper regions.

“Minnie, don’t be late. Here comes the horse”—it was always the horse,
never the carriage. “Where’s Charlotte? Run up and hurry her. Why is
she so long? She had nothing to do. She never brings anything but
blouses. Poor Charlotte—How I do detest blouses! Minnie!”

Paganism is infectious—more infectious than diphtheria or piety—and the
Rector’s niece was taken to church protesting. As usual, she didn’t see
why. Why shouldn’t she sit in the sun with the young men? The young
men, who had now appeared, mocked her with ungenerous words. Mrs.
Honeychurch defended orthodoxy, and in the midst of the confusion Miss
Bartlett, dressed in the very height of the fashion, came strolling
down the stairs.

“Dear Marian, I am very sorry, but I have no small change—nothing but
sovereigns and half crowns. Could any one give me—”

“Yes, easily. Jump in. Gracious me, how smart you look! What a lovely
frock! You put us all to shame.”

“If I did not wear my best rags and tatters now, when should I wear
them?” said Miss Bartlett reproachfully. She got into the victoria and
placed herself with her back to the horse. The necessary roar ensued,
and then they drove off.

“Good-bye! Be good!” called out Cecil.

Lucy bit her lip, for the tone was sneering. On the subject of “church
and so on” they had had rather an unsatisfactory conversation. He had
said that people ought to overhaul themselves, and she did not want to
overhaul herself; she did not know it was done. Honest orthodoxy Cecil
respected, but he always assumed that honesty is the result of a
spiritual crisis; he could not imagine it as a natural birthright, that
might grow heavenward like flowers. All that he said on this subject
pained her, though he exuded tolerance from every pore; somehow the
Emersons were different.

She saw the Emersons after church. There was a line of carriages down
the road, and the Honeychurch vehicle happened to be opposite Cissie
Villa. To save time, they walked over the green to it, and found father
and son smoking in the garden.

“Introduce me,” said her mother. “Unless the young man considers that
he knows me already.”

He probably did; but Lucy ignored the Sacred Lake and introduced them
formally. Old Mr. Emerson claimed her with much warmth, and said how
glad he was that she was going to be married. She said yes, she was
glad too; and then, as Miss Bartlett and Minnie were lingering behind
with Mr. Beebe, she turned the conversation to a less disturbing topic,
and asked him how he liked his new house.

“Very much,” he replied, but there was a note of offence in his voice;
she had never known him offended before. He added: “We find, though,
that the Miss Alans were coming, and that we have turned them out.
Women mind such a thing. I am very much upset about it.”

“I believe that there was some misunderstanding,” said Mrs. Honeychurch
uneasily.

“Our landlord was told that we should be a different type of person,”
said George, who seemed disposed to carry the matter further. “He
thought we should be artistic. He is disappointed.”

“And I wonder whether we ought to write to the Miss Alans and offer to
give it up. What do you think?” He appealed to Lucy.

“Oh, stop now you have come,” said Lucy lightly. She must avoid
censuring Cecil. For it was on Cecil that the little episode turned,
though his name was never mentioned.

“So George says. He says that the Miss Alans must go to the wall. Yet
it does seem so unkind.”

“There is only a certain amount of kindness in the world,” said George,
watching the sunlight flash on the panels of the passing carriages.

“Yes!” exclaimed Mrs. Honeychurch. “That’s exactly what I say. Why all
this twiddling and twaddling over two Miss Alans?”

“There is a certain amount of kindness, just as there is a certain
amount of light,” he continued in measured tones. “We cast a shadow on
something wherever we stand, and it is no good moving from place to
place to save things; because the shadow always follows. Choose a place
where you won’t do harm—yes, choose a place where you won’t do very
much harm, and stand in it for all you are worth, facing the sunshine.”

“Oh, Mr. Emerson, I see you’re clever!”

“Eh—?”

“I see you’re going to be clever. I hope you didn’t go behaving like
that to poor Freddy.”

George’s eyes laughed, and Lucy suspected that he and her mother would
get on rather well.

“No, I didn’t,” he said. “He behaved that way to me. It is his
philosophy. Only he starts life with it; and I have tried the Note of
Interrogation first.”

“What _do_ you mean? No, never mind what you mean. Don’t explain. He
looks forward to seeing you this afternoon. Do you play tennis? Do you
mind tennis on Sunday—?”

“George mind tennis on Sunday! George, after his education, distinguish
between Sunday—”

“Very well, George doesn’t mind tennis on Sunday. No more do I. That’s
settled. Mr. Emerson, if you could come with your son we should be so
pleased.”

He thanked her, but the walk sounded rather far; he could only potter
about in these days.

She turned to George: “And then he wants to give up his house to the
Miss Alans.”

“I know,” said George, and put his arm round his father’s neck. The
kindness that Mr. Beebe and Lucy had always known to exist in him came
out suddenly, like sunlight touching a vast landscape—a touch of the
morning sun? She remembered that in all his perversities he had never
spoken against affection.

Miss Bartlett approached.

“You know our cousin, Miss Bartlett,” said Mrs. Honeychurch pleasantly.
“You met her with my daughter in Florence.”

“Yes, indeed!” said the old man, and made as if he would come out of
the garden to meet the lady. Miss Bartlett promptly got into the
victoria. Thus entrenched, she emitted a formal bow. It was the pension
Bertolini again, the dining-table with the decanters of water and wine.
It was the old, old battle of the room with the view.

George did not respond to the bow. Like any boy, he blushed and was
ashamed; he knew that the chaperon remembered. He said: “I—I’ll come up
to tennis if I can manage it,” and went into the house. Perhaps
anything that he did would have pleased Lucy, but his awkwardness went
straight to her heart; men were not gods after all, but as human and as
clumsy as girls; even men might suffer from unexplained desires, and
need help. To one of her upbringing, and of her destination, the
weakness of men was a truth unfamiliar, but she had surmised it at
Florence, when George threw her photographs into the River Arno.

“George, don’t go,” cried his father, who thought it a great treat for
people if his son would talk to them. “George has been in such good
spirits today, and I am sure he will end by coming up this afternoon.”

Lucy caught her cousin’s eye. Something in its mute appeal made her
reckless. “Yes,” she said, raising her voice, “I do hope he will.” Then
she went to the carriage and murmured, “The old man hasn’t been told; I
knew it was all right.” Mrs. Honeychurch followed her, and they drove
away.

Satisfactory that Mr. Emerson had not been told of the Florence
escapade; yet Lucy’s spirits should not have leapt up as if she had
sighted the ramparts of heaven. Satisfactory; yet surely she greeted it
with disproportionate joy. All the way home the horses’ hoofs sang a
tune to her: “He has not told, he has not told.” Her brain expanded the
melody: “He has not told his father—to whom he tells all things. It was
not an exploit. He did not laugh at me when I had gone.” She raised her
hand to her cheek. “He does not love me. No. How terrible if he did!
But he has not told. He will not tell.”

She longed to shout the words: “It is all right. It’s a secret between
us two for ever. Cecil will never hear.” She was even glad that Miss
Bartlett had made her promise secrecy, that last dark evening at
Florence, when they had knelt packing in his room. The secret, big or
little, was guarded.

Only three English people knew of it in the world. Thus she interpreted
her joy. She greeted Cecil with unusual radiance, because she felt so
safe. As he helped her out of the carriage, she said:

“The Emersons have been so nice. George Emerson has improved
enormously.”

“How are my protégés?” asked Cecil, who took no real interest in them,
and had long since forgotten his resolution to bring them to Windy
Corner for educational purposes.

“Protégés!” she exclaimed with some warmth. For the only relationship
which Cecil conceived was feudal: that of protector and protected. He
had no glimpse of the comradeship after which the girl’s soul yearned.

“You shall see for yourself how your protégés are. George Emerson is
coming up this afternoon. He is a most interesting man to talk to. Only
don’t—” She nearly said, “Don’t protect him.” But the bell was ringing
for lunch, and, as often happened, Cecil had paid no great attention to
her remarks. Charm, not argument, was to be her forte.

Lunch was a cheerful meal. Generally Lucy was depressed at meals. Some
one had to be soothed—either Cecil or Miss Bartlett or a Being not
visible to the mortal eye—a Being who whispered to her soul: “It will
not last, this cheerfulness. In January you must go to London to
entertain the grandchildren of celebrated men.” But to-day she felt she
had received a guarantee. Her mother would always sit there, her
brother here. The sun, though it had moved a little since the morning,
would never be hidden behind the western hills. After luncheon they
asked her to play. She had seen Gluck’s Armide that year, and played
from memory the music of the enchanted garden—the music to which Renaud
approaches, beneath the light of an eternal dawn, the music that never
gains, never wanes, but ripples for ever like the tideless seas of
fairyland. Such music is not for the piano, and her audience began to
get restive, and Cecil, sharing the discontent, called out: “Now play
us the other garden—the one in Parsifal.”

She closed the instrument.

“Not very dutiful,” said her mother’s voice.

Fearing that she had offended Cecil, she turned quickly round. There
George was. He had crept in without interrupting her.

“Oh, I had no idea!” she exclaimed, getting very red; and then, without
a word of greeting, she reopened the piano. Cecil should have the
Parsifal, and anything else that he liked.

“Our performer has changed her mind,” said Miss Bartlett, perhaps
implying, she will play the music to Mr. Emerson. Lucy did not know
what to do nor even what she wanted to do. She played a few bars of the
Flower Maidens’ song very badly and then she stopped.

“I vote tennis,” said Freddy, disgusted at the scrappy entertainment.

“Yes, so do I.” Once more she closed the unfortunate piano. “I vote you
have a men’s four.”

“All right.”

“Not for me, thank you,” said Cecil. “I will not spoil the set.” He
never realized that it may be an act of kindness in a bad player to
make up a fourth.

“Oh, come along Cecil. I’m bad, Floyd’s rotten, and so I dare say’s
Emerson.”

George corrected him: “I am not bad.”

One looked down one’s nose at this. “Then certainly I won’t play,” said
Cecil, while Miss Bartlett, under the impression that she was snubbing
George, added: “I agree with you, Mr. Vyse. You had much better not
play. Much better not.”

Minnie, rushing in where Cecil feared to tread, announced that she
would play. “I shall miss every ball anyway, so what does it matter?”
But Sunday intervened and stamped heavily upon the kindly suggestion.

“Then it will have to be Lucy,” said Mrs. Honeychurch; “you must fall
back on Lucy. There is no other way out of it. Lucy, go and change your
frock.”

Lucy’s Sabbath was generally of this amphibious nature. She kept it
without hypocrisy in the morning, and broke it without reluctance in
the afternoon. As she changed her frock, she wondered whether Cecil was
sneering at her; really she must overhaul herself and settle everything
up before she married him.

Mr. Floyd was her partner. She liked music, but how much better tennis
seemed. How much better to run about in comfortable clothes than to sit
at the piano and feel girt under the arms. Once more music appeared to
her the employment of a child. George served, and surprised her by his
anxiety to win. She remembered how he had sighed among the tombs at
Santa Croce because things wouldn’t fit; how after the death of that
obscure Italian he had leant over the parapet by the Arno and said to
her: “I shall want to live, I tell you.” He wanted to live now, to win
at tennis, to stand for all he was worth in the sun—the sun which had
begun to decline and was shining in her eyes; and he did win.

Ah, how beautiful the Weald looked! The hills stood out above its
radiance, as Fiesole stands above the Tuscan Plain, and the South
Downs, if one chose, were the mountains of Carrara. She might be
forgetting her Italy, but she was noticing more things in her England.
One could play a new game with the view, and try to find in its
innumerable folds some town or village that would do for Florence. Ah,
how beautiful the Weald looked!

But now Cecil claimed her. He chanced to be in a lucid critical mood,
and would not sympathize with exaltation. He had been rather a nuisance
all through the tennis, for the novel that he was reading was so bad
that he was obliged to read it aloud to others. He would stroll round
the precincts of the court and call out: “I say, listen to this, Lucy.
Three split infinitives.”

“Dreadful!” said Lucy, and missed her stroke. When they had finished
their set, he still went on reading; there was some murder scene, and
really everyone must listen to it. Freddy and Mr. Floyd were obliged to
hunt for a lost ball in the laurels, but the other two acquiesced.

“The scene is laid in Florence.”

“What fun, Cecil! Read away. Come, Mr. Emerson, sit down after all your
energy.” She had “forgiven” George, as she put it, and she made a point
of being pleasant to him.

He jumped over the net and sat down at her feet asking: “You—and are
you tired?”

“Of course I’m not!”

“Do you mind being beaten?”

She was going to answer, “No,” when it struck her that she did mind, so
she answered, “Yes.” She added merrily, “I don’t see _you’re_ such a
splendid player, though. The light was behind you, and it was in my
eyes.”

“I never said I was.”

“Why, you did!”

“You didn’t attend.”

“You said—oh, don’t go in for accuracy at this house. We all
exaggerate, and we get very angry with people who don’t.”

“‘The scene is laid in Florence,’” repeated Cecil, with an upward note.

Lucy recollected herself.

“‘Sunset. Leonora was speeding—’”

Lucy interrupted. “Leonora? Is Leonora the heroine? Who’s the book by?”

“Joseph Emery Prank. ‘Sunset. Leonora speeding across the square. Pray
the saints she might not arrive too late. Sunset—the sunset of Italy.
Under Orcagna’s Loggia—the Loggia de’ Lanzi, as we sometimes call it
now—’”

Lucy burst into laughter. “‘Joseph Emery Prank’ indeed! Why it’s Miss
Lavish! It’s Miss Lavish’s novel, and she’s publishing it under
somebody else’s name.”

“Who may Miss Lavish be?”

“Oh, a dreadful person—Mr. Emerson, you remember Miss Lavish?”

Excited by her pleasant afternoon, she clapped her hands.

George looked up. “Of course I do. I saw her the day I arrived at
Summer Street. It was she who told me that you lived here.”

“Weren’t you pleased?” She meant “to see Miss Lavish,” but when he bent
down to the grass without replying, it struck her that she could mean
something else. She watched his head, which was almost resting against
her knee, and she thought that the ears were reddening. “No wonder the
novel’s bad,” she added. “I never liked Miss Lavish. But I suppose one
ought to read it as one’s met her.”

“All modern books are bad,” said Cecil, who was annoyed at her
inattention, and vented his annoyance on literature. “Every one writes
for money in these days.”

“Oh, Cecil—!”

“It is so. I will inflict Joseph Emery Prank on you no longer.”

Cecil, this afternoon seemed such a twittering sparrow. The ups and
downs in his voice were noticeable, but they did not affect her. She
had dwelt amongst melody and movement, and her nerves refused to answer
to the clang of his. Leaving him to be annoyed, she gazed at the black
head again. She did not want to stroke it, but she saw herself wanting
to stroke it; the sensation was curious.

“How do you like this view of ours, Mr. Emerson?”

“I never notice much difference in views.”

“What do you mean?”

“Because they’re all alike. Because all that matters in them is
distance and air.”

“H’m!” said Cecil, uncertain whether the remark was striking or not.

“My father”—he looked up at her (and he was a little flushed)—“says
that there is only one perfect view—the view of the sky straight over
our heads, and that all these views on earth are but bungled copies of
it.”

“I expect your father has been reading Dante,” said Cecil, fingering
the novel, which alone permitted him to lead the conversation.

“He told us another day that views are really crowds—crowds of trees
and houses and hills—and are bound to resemble each other, like human
crowds—and that the power they have over us is sometimes supernatural,
for the same reason.”

Lucy’s lips parted.

“For a crowd is more than the people who make it up. Something gets
added to it—no one knows how—just as something has got added to those
hills.”

He pointed with his racquet to the South Downs.

“What a splendid idea!” she murmured. “I shall enjoy hearing your
father talk again. I’m so sorry he’s not so well.”

“No, he isn’t well.”

“There’s an absurd account of a view in this book,” said Cecil. “Also
that men fall into two classes—those who forget views and those who
remember them, even in small rooms.”

“Mr. Emerson, have you any brothers or sisters?”

“None. Why?”

“You spoke of ‘us.’”

“My mother, I was meaning.”

Cecil closed the novel with a bang.

“Oh, Cecil—how you made me jump!”

“I will inflict Joseph Emery Prank on you no longer.”

“I can just remember us all three going into the country for the day
and seeing as far as Hindhead. It is the first thing that I remember.”

Cecil got up; the man was ill-bred—he hadn’t put on his coat after
tennis—he didn’t do. He would have strolled away if Lucy had not
stopped him.

“Cecil, do read the thing about the view.”

“Not while Mr. Emerson is here to entertain us.”

“No—read away. I think nothing’s funnier than to hear silly things read
out loud. If Mr. Emerson thinks us frivolous, he can go.”

This struck Cecil as subtle, and pleased him. It put their visitor in
the position of a prig. Somewhat mollified, he sat down again.

“Mr. Emerson, go and find tennis balls.” She opened the book. Cecil
must have his reading and anything else that he liked. But her
attention wandered to George’s mother, who—according to Mr. Eager—had
been murdered in the sight of God and—according to her son—had seen as
far as Hindhead.

“Am I really to go?” asked George.

“No, of course not really,” she answered.

“Chapter two,” said Cecil, yawning. “Find me chapter two, if it isn’t
bothering you.”

Chapter two was found, and she glanced at its opening sentences.

She thought she had gone mad.

“Here—hand me the book.”

She heard her voice saying: “It isn’t worth reading—it’s too silly to
read—I never saw such rubbish—it oughtn’t to be allowed to be printed.”

He took the book from her.

“‘Leonora,’” he read, “‘sat pensive and alone. Before her lay the rich
champaign of Tuscany, dotted over with many a smiling village. The
season was spring.’”

Miss Lavish knew, somehow, and had printed the past in draggled prose,
for Cecil to read and for George to hear.

“‘A golden haze,’” he read. He read: “‘Afar off the towers of Florence,
while the bank on which she sat was carpeted with violets. All
unobserved Antonio stole up behind her—’”

Lest Cecil should see her face she turned to George and saw his face.

He read: “‘There came from his lips no wordy protestation such as
formal lovers use. No eloquence was his, nor did he suffer from the
lack of it. He simply enfolded her in his manly arms.’”

“This isn’t the passage I wanted,” he informed them, “there is another
much funnier, further on.” He turned over the leaves.

“Should we go in to tea?” said Lucy, whose voice remained steady.

She led the way up the garden, Cecil following her, George last. She
thought a disaster was averted. But when they entered the shrubbery it
came. The book, as if it had not worked mischief enough, had been
forgotten, and Cecil must go back for it; and George, who loved
passionately, must blunder against her in the narrow path.

“No—” she gasped, and, for the second time, was kissed by him.

As if no more was possible, he slipped back; Cecil rejoined her; they
reached the upper lawn alone.




Chapter XVI
Lying to George


But Lucy had developed since the spring. That is to say, she was now
better able to stifle the emotions of which the conventions and the
world disapprove. Though the danger was greater, she was not shaken by
deep sobs. She said to Cecil, “I am not coming in to tea—tell mother—I
must write some letters,” and went up to her room. Then she prepared
for action. Love felt and returned, love which our bodies exact and our
hearts have transfigured, love which is the most real thing that we
shall ever meet, reappeared now as the world’s enemy, and she must
stifle it.

She sent for Miss Bartlett.

The contest lay not between love and duty. Perhaps there never is such
a contest. It lay between the real and the pretended, and Lucy’s first
aim was to defeat herself. As her brain clouded over, as the memory of
the views grew dim and the words of the book died away, she returned to
her old shibboleth of nerves. She “conquered her breakdown.” Tampering
with the truth, she forgot that the truth had ever been. Remembering
that she was engaged to Cecil, she compelled herself to confused
remembrances of George; he was nothing to her; he never had been
anything; he had behaved abominably; she had never encouraged him. The
armour of falsehood is subtly wrought out of darkness, and hides a man
not only from others, but from his own soul. In a few moments Lucy was
equipped for battle.

“Something too awful has happened,” she began, as soon as her cousin
arrived. “Do you know anything about Miss Lavish’s novel?”

Miss Bartlett looked surprised, and said that she had not read the
book, nor known that it was published; Eleanor was a reticent woman at
heart.

“There is a scene in it. The hero and heroine make love. Do you know
about that?”

“Dear—?”

“Do you know about it, please?” she repeated. “They are on a hillside,
and Florence is in the distance.”

“My good Lucia, I am all at sea. I know nothing about it whatever.”

“There are violets. I cannot believe it is a coincidence. Charlotte,
Charlotte, how _could_ you have told her? I have thought before
speaking; it _must_ be you.”

“Told her what?” she asked, with growing agitation.

“About that dreadful afternoon in February.”

Miss Bartlett was genuinely moved. “Oh, Lucy, dearest girl—she hasn’t
put that in her book?”

Lucy nodded.

“Not so that one could recognize it. Yes.”

“Then never—never—never more shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend of mine.”

“So you did tell?”

“I did just happen—when I had tea with her at Rome—in the course of
conversation—”

“But Charlotte—what about the promise you gave me when we were packing?
Why did you tell Miss Lavish, when you wouldn’t even let me tell
mother?”

“I will never forgive Eleanor. She has betrayed my confidence.”

“Why did you tell her, though? This is a most serious thing.”

Why does any one tell anything? The question is eternal, and it was not
surprising that Miss Bartlett should only sigh faintly in response. She
had done wrong—she admitted it, she only hoped that she had not done
harm; she had told Eleanor in the strictest confidence.

Lucy stamped with irritation.

“Cecil happened to read out the passage aloud to me and to Mr. Emerson;
it upset Mr. Emerson and he insulted me again. Behind Cecil’s back.
Ugh! Is it possible that men are such brutes? Behind Cecil’s back as we
were walking up the garden.”

Miss Bartlett burst into self-accusations and regrets.

“What is to be done now? Can you tell me?”

“Oh, Lucy—I shall never forgive myself, never to my dying day. Fancy if
your prospects—”

“I know,” said Lucy, wincing at the word. “I see now why you wanted me
to tell Cecil, and what you meant by ‘some other source.’ You knew that
you had told Miss Lavish, and that she was not reliable.”

It was Miss Bartlett’s turn to wince. “However,” said the girl,
despising her cousin’s shiftiness, “What’s done’s done. You have put me
in a most awkward position. How am I to get out of it?”

Miss Bartlett could not think. The days of her energy were over. She
was a visitor, not a chaperon, and a discredited visitor at that. She
stood with clasped hands while the girl worked herself into the
necessary rage.

“He must—that man must have such a setting down that he won’t forget.
And who’s to give it him? I can’t tell mother now—owing to you. Nor
Cecil, Charlotte, owing to you. I am caught up every way. I think I
shall go mad. I have no one to help me. That’s why I’ve sent for you.
What’s wanted is a man with a whip.”

Miss Bartlett agreed: one wanted a man with a whip.

“Yes—but it’s no good agreeing. What’s to be _done?_ We women go
maundering on. What _does_ a girl do when she comes across a cad?”

“I always said he was a cad, dear. Give me credit for that, at all
events. From the very first moment—when he said his father was having a
bath.”

“Oh, bother the credit and who’s been right or wrong! We’ve both made a
muddle of it. George Emerson is still down the garden there, and is he
to be left unpunished, or isn’t he? I want to know.”

Miss Bartlett was absolutely helpless. Her own exposure had unnerved
her, and thoughts were colliding painfully in her brain. She moved
feebly to the window, and tried to detect the cad’s white flannels
among the laurels.

“You were ready enough at the Bertolini when you rushed me off to Rome.
Can’t you speak again to him now?”

“Willingly would I move heaven and earth—”

“I want something more definite,” said Lucy contemptuously. “Will you
speak to him? It is the least you can do, surely, considering it all
happened because you broke your word.”

“Never again shall Eleanor Lavish be a friend of mine.”

Really, Charlotte was outdoing herself.

“Yes or no, please; yes or no.”

“It is the kind of thing that only a gentleman can settle.” George
Emerson was coming up the garden with a tennis ball in his hand.

“Very well,” said Lucy, with an angry gesture. “No one will help me. I
will speak to him myself.” And immediately she realized that this was
what her cousin had intended all along.

“Hullo, Emerson!” called Freddy from below. “Found the lost ball? Good
man! Want any tea?” And there was an irruption from the house on to the
terrace.

“Oh, Lucy, but that is brave of you! I admire you—”

They had gathered round George, who beckoned, she felt, over the
rubbish, the sloppy thoughts, the furtive yearnings that were beginning
to cumber her soul. Her anger faded at the sight of him. Ah! The
Emersons were fine people in their way. She had to subdue a rush in her
blood before saying:

“Freddy has taken him into the dining-room. The others are going down
the garden. Come. Let us get this over quickly. Come. I want you in the
room, of course.”

“Lucy, do you mind doing it?”

“How can you ask such a ridiculous question?”

“Poor Lucy—” She stretched out her hand. “I seem to bring nothing but
misfortune wherever I go.” Lucy nodded. She remembered their last
evening at Florence—the packing, the candle, the shadow of Miss
Bartlett’s toque on the door. She was not to be trapped by pathos a
second time. Eluding her cousin’s caress, she led the way downstairs.

“Try the jam,” Freddy was saying. “The jam’s jolly good.”

George, looking big and dishevelled, was pacing up and down the
dining-room. As she entered he stopped, and said:

“No—nothing to eat.”

“You go down to the others,” said Lucy; “Charlotte and I will give Mr.
Emerson all he wants. Where’s mother?”

“She’s started on her Sunday writing. She’s in the drawing-room.”

“That’s all right. You go away.”

He went off singing.

Lucy sat down at the table. Miss Bartlett, who was thoroughly
frightened, took up a book and pretended to read.

She would not be drawn into an elaborate speech. She just said: “I
can’t have it, Mr. Emerson. I cannot even talk to you. Go out of this
house, and never come into it again as long as I live here—” flushing
as she spoke and pointing to the door. “I hate a row. Go please.”

“What—”

“No discussion.”

“But I can’t—”

She shook her head. “Go, please. I do not want to call in Mr. Vyse.”

“You don’t mean,” he said, absolutely ignoring Miss Bartlett—“you don’t
mean that you are going to marry that man?”

The line was unexpected.

She shrugged her shoulders, as if his vulgarity wearied her. “You are
merely ridiculous,” she said quietly.

Then his words rose gravely over hers: “You cannot live with Vyse. He’s
only for an acquaintance. He is for society and cultivated talk. He
should know no one intimately, least of all a woman.”

It was a new light on Cecil’s character.

“Have you ever talked to Vyse without feeling tired?”

“I can scarcely discuss—”

“No, but have you ever? He is the sort who are all right so long as
they keep to things—books, pictures—but kill when they come to people.
That’s why I’ll speak out through all this muddle even now. It’s
shocking enough to lose you in any case, but generally a man must deny
himself joy, and I would have held back if your Cecil had been a
different person. I would never have let myself go. But I saw him first
in the National Gallery, when he winced because my father mispronounced
the names of great painters. Then he brings us here, and we find it is
to play some silly trick on a kind neighbour. That is the man all
over—playing tricks on people, on the most sacred form of life that he
can find. Next, I meet you together, and find him protecting and
teaching you and your mother to be shocked, when it was for _you_ to
settle whether you were shocked or no. Cecil all over again. He daren’t
let a woman decide. He’s the type who’s kept Europe back for a thousand
years. Every moment of his life he’s forming you, telling you what’s
charming or amusing or ladylike, telling you what a man thinks womanly;
and you, you of all women, listen to his voice instead of to your own.
So it was at the Rectory, when I met you both again; so it has been the
whole of this afternoon. Therefore—not ‘therefore I kissed you,’
because the book made me do that, and I wish to goodness I had more
self-control. I’m not ashamed. I don’t apologize. But it has frightened
you, and you may not have noticed that I love you. Or would you have
told me to go, and dealt with a tremendous thing so lightly? But
therefore—therefore I settled to fight him.”

Lucy thought of a very good remark.

“You say Mr. Vyse wants me to listen to him, Mr. Emerson. Pardon me for
suggesting that you have caught the habit.”

And he took the shoddy reproof and touched it into immortality. He
said:

“Yes, I have,” and sank down as if suddenly weary. “I’m the same kind
of brute at bottom. This desire to govern a woman—it lies very deep,
and men and women must fight it together before they shall enter the
garden. But I do love you surely in a better way than he does.” He
thought. “Yes—really in a better way. I want you to have your own
thoughts even when I hold you in my arms.” He stretched them towards
her. “Lucy, be quick—there’s no time for us to talk now—come to me as
you came in the spring, and afterwards I will be gentle and explain. I
have cared for you since that man died. I cannot live without you, ‘No
good,’ I thought; ‘she is marrying someone else’; but I meet you again
when all the world is glorious water and sun. As you came through the
wood I saw that nothing else mattered. I called. I wanted to live and
have my chance of joy.”

“And Mr. Vyse?” said Lucy, who kept commendably calm. “Does he not
matter? That I love Cecil and shall be his wife shortly? A detail of no
importance, I suppose?”

But he stretched his arms over the table towards her.

“May I ask what you intend to gain by this exhibition?”

He said: “It is our last chance. I shall do all that I can.” And as if
he had done all else, he turned to Miss Bartlett, who sat like some
portent against the skies of the evening. “You wouldn’t stop us this
second time if you understood,” he said. “I have been into the dark,
and I am going back into it, unless you will try to understand.”

Her long, narrow head drove backwards and forwards, as though
demolishing some invisible obstacle. She did not answer.

“It is being young,” he said quietly, picking up his racquet from the
floor and preparing to go. “It is being certain that Lucy cares for me
really. It is that love and youth matter intellectually.”

In silence the two women watched him. His last remark, they knew, was
nonsense, but was he going after it or not? Would not he, the cad, the
charlatan, attempt a more dramatic finish? No. He was apparently
content. He left them, carefully closing the front door; and when they
looked through the hall window, they saw him go up the drive and begin
to climb the slopes of withered fern behind the house. Their tongues
were loosed, and they burst into stealthy rejoicings.

“Oh, Lucia—come back here—oh, what an awful man!”

Lucy had no reaction—at least, not yet. “Well, he amuses me,” she said.
“Either I’m mad, or else he is, and I’m inclined to think it’s the
latter. One more fuss through with you, Charlotte. Many thanks. I
think, though, that this is the last. My admirer will hardly trouble me
again.”

And Miss Bartlett, too, essayed the roguish:

“Well, it isn’t everyone who could boast such a conquest, dearest, is
it? Oh, one oughtn’t to laugh, really. It might have been very serious.
But you were so sensible and brave—so unlike the girls of my day.”

“Let’s go down to them.”

But, once in the open air, she paused. Some emotion—pity, terror, love,
but the emotion was strong—seized her, and she was aware of autumn.
Summer was ending, and the evening brought her odours of decay, the
more pathetic because they were reminiscent of spring. That something
or other mattered intellectually? A leaf, violently agitated, danced
past her, while other leaves lay motionless. That the earth was
hastening to re-enter darkness, and the shadows of those trees over
Windy Corner?

“Hullo, Lucy! There’s still light enough for another set, if you two’ll
hurry.”

“Mr. Emerson has had to go.”

“What a nuisance! That spoils the four. I say, Cecil, do play, do,
there’s a good chap. It’s Floyd’s last day. Do play tennis with us,
just this once.”

Cecil’s voice came: “My dear Freddy, I am no athlete. As you well
remarked this very morning, ‘There are some chaps who are no good for
anything but books’; I plead guilty to being such a chap, and will not
inflict myself on you.”

The scales fell from Lucy’s eyes. How had she stood Cecil for a moment?
He was absolutely intolerable, and the same evening she broke off her
engagement.




Chapter XVII
Lying to Cecil


He was bewildered. He had nothing to say. He was not even angry, but
stood, with a glass of whiskey between his hands, trying to think what
had led her to such a conclusion.

She had chosen the moment before bed, when, in accordance with their
bourgeois habit, she always dispensed drinks to the men. Freddy and Mr.
Floyd were sure to retire with their glasses, while Cecil invariably
lingered, sipping at his while she locked up the sideboard.

“I am very sorry about it,” she said; “I have carefully thought things
over. We are too different. I must ask you to release me, and try to
forget that there ever was such a foolish girl.”

It was a suitable speech, but she was more angry than sorry, and her
voice showed it.

“Different—how—how—”

“I haven’t had a really good education, for one thing,” she continued,
still on her knees by the sideboard. “My Italian trip came too late,
and I am forgetting all that I learnt there. I shall never be able to
talk to your friends, or behave as a wife of yours should.”

“I don’t understand you. You aren’t like yourself. You’re tired, Lucy.”

“Tired!” she retorted, kindling at once. “That is exactly like you. You
always think women don’t mean what they say.”

“Well, you sound tired, as if something has worried you.”

“What if I do? It doesn’t prevent me from realizing the truth. I can’t
marry you, and you will thank me for saying so some day.”

“You had that bad headache yesterday—All right”—for she had exclaimed
indignantly: “I see it’s much more than headaches. But give me a
moment’s time.” He closed his eyes. “You must excuse me if I say stupid
things, but my brain has gone to pieces. Part of it lives three minutes
back, when I was sure that you loved me, and the other part—I find it
difficult—I am likely to say the wrong thing.”

It struck her that he was not behaving so badly, and her irritation
increased. She again desired a struggle, not a discussion. To bring on
the crisis, she said:

“There are days when one sees clearly, and this is one of them. Things
must come to a breaking-point some time, and it happens to be to-day.
If you want to know, quite a little thing decided me to speak to
you—when you wouldn’t play tennis with Freddy.”

“I never do play tennis,” said Cecil, painfully bewildered; “I never
could play. I don’t understand a word you say.”

“You can play well enough to make up a four. I thought it abominably
selfish of you.”

“No, I can’t—well, never mind the tennis. Why couldn’t you—couldn’t you
have warned me if you felt anything wrong? You talked of our wedding at
lunch—at least, you let me talk.”

“I knew you wouldn’t understand,” said Lucy quite crossly. “I might
have known there would have been these dreadful explanations. Of
course, it isn’t the tennis—that was only the last straw to all I have
been feeling for weeks. Surely it was better not to speak until I felt
certain.” She developed this position. “Often before I have wondered if
I was fitted for your wife—for instance, in London; and are you fitted
to be my husband? I don’t think so. You don’t like Freddy, nor my
mother. There was always a lot against our engagement, Cecil, but all
our relations seemed pleased, and we met so often, and it was no good
mentioning it until—well, until all things came to a point. They have
to-day. I see clearly. I must speak. That’s all.”

“I cannot think you were right,” said Cecil gently. “I cannot tell why,
but though all that you say sounds true, I feel that you are not
treating me fairly. It’s all too horrible.”

“What’s the good of a scene?”

“No good. But surely I have a right to hear a little more.”

He put down his glass and opened the window. From where she knelt,
jangling her keys, she could see a slit of darkness, and, peering into
it, as if it would tell him that “little more,” his long, thoughtful
face.

“Don’t open the window; and you’d better draw the curtain, too; Freddy
or any one might be outside.” He obeyed. “I really think we had better
go to bed, if you don’t mind. I shall only say things that will make me
unhappy afterwards. As you say it is all too horrible, and it is no
good talking.”

But to Cecil, now that he was about to lose her, she seemed each moment
more desirable. He looked at her, instead of through her, for the first
time since they were engaged. From a Leonardo she had become a living
woman, with mysteries and forces of her own, with qualities that even
eluded art. His brain recovered from the shock, and, in a burst of
genuine devotion, he cried: “But I love you, and I did think you loved
me!”

“I did not,” she said. “I thought I did at first. I am sorry, and ought
to have refused you this last time, too.”

He began to walk up and down the room, and she grew more and more vexed
at his dignified behaviour. She had counted on his being petty. It
would have made things easier for her. By a cruel irony she was drawing
out all that was finest in his disposition.

“You don’t love me, evidently. I dare say you are right not to. But it
would hurt a little less if I knew why.”

“Because”—a phrase came to her, and she accepted it—“you’re the sort
who can’t know any one intimately.”

A horrified look came into his eyes.

“I don’t mean exactly that. But you will question me, though I beg you
not to, and I must say something. It is that, more or less. When we
were only acquaintances, you let me be myself, but now you’re always
protecting me.” Her voice swelled. “I won’t be protected. I will choose
for myself what is ladylike and right. To shield me is an insult. Can’t
I be trusted to face the truth but I must get it second-hand through
you? A woman’s place! You despise my mother—I know you do—because she’s
conventional and bothers over puddings; but, oh goodness!”—she rose to
her feet—“conventional, Cecil, you’re that, for you may understand
beautiful things, but you don’t know how to use them; and you wrap
yourself up in art and books and music, and would try to wrap up me. I
won’t be stifled, not by the most glorious music, for people are more
glorious, and you hide them from me. That’s why I break off my
engagement. You were all right as long as you kept to things, but when
you came to people—” She stopped.

There was a pause. Then Cecil said with great emotion:

“It is true.”

“True on the whole,” she corrected, full of some vague shame.

“True, every word. It is a revelation. It is—I.”

“Anyhow, those are my reasons for not being your wife.”

He repeated: “‘The sort that can know no one intimately.’ It is true. I
fell to pieces the very first day we were engaged. I behaved like a cad
to Beebe and to your brother. You are even greater than I thought.” She
withdrew a step. “I’m not going to worry you. You are far too good to
me. I shall never forget your insight; and, dear, I only blame you for
this: you might have warned me in the early stages, before you felt you
wouldn’t marry me, and so have given me a chance to improve. I have
never known you till this evening. I have just used you as a peg for my
silly notions of what a woman should be. But this evening you are a
different person: new thoughts—even a new voice—”

“What do you mean by a new voice?” she asked, seized with
incontrollable anger.

“I mean that a new person seems speaking through you,” said he.

Then she lost her balance. She cried: “If you think I am in love with
some one else, you are very much mistaken.”

“Of course I don’t think that. You are not that kind, Lucy.”

“Oh, yes, you do think it. It’s your old idea, the idea that has kept
Europe back—I mean the idea that women are always thinking of men. If a
girl breaks off her engagement, everyone says: ‘Oh, she had someone
else in her mind; she hopes to get someone else.’ It’s disgusting,
brutal! As if a girl can’t break it off for the sake of freedom.”

He answered reverently: “I may have said that in the past. I shall
never say it again. You have taught me better.”

She began to redden, and pretended to examine the windows again.

“Of course, there is no question of ‘someone else’ in this, no
‘jilting’ or any such nauseous stupidity. I beg your pardon most humbly
if my words suggested that there was. I only meant that there was a
force in you that I hadn’t known of up till now.”

“All right, Cecil, that will do. Don’t apologize to me. It was my
mistake.”

“It is a question between ideals, yours and mine—pure abstract ideals,
and yours are the nobler. I was bound up in the old vicious notions,
and all the time you were splendid and new.” His voice broke. “I must
actually thank you for what you have done—for showing me what I really
am. Solemnly, I thank you for showing me a true woman. Will you shake
hands?”

“Of course I will,” said Lucy, twisting up her other hand in the
curtains. “Good-night, Cecil. Good-bye. That’s all right. I’m sorry
about it. Thank you very much for your gentleness.”

“Let me light your candle, shall I?”

They went into the hall.

“Thank you. Good-night again. God bless you, Lucy!”

“Good-bye, Cecil.”

She watched him steal up-stairs, while the shadows from three banisters
passed over her face like the beat of wings. On the landing he paused
strong in his renunciation, and gave her a look of memorable beauty.
For all his culture, Cecil was an ascetic at heart, and nothing in his
love became him like the leaving of it.

She could never marry. In the tumult of her soul, that stood firm.
Cecil believed in her; she must some day believe in herself. She must
be one of the women whom she had praised so eloquently, who care for
liberty and not for men; she must forget that George loved her, that
George had been thinking through her and gained her this honourable
release, that George had gone away into—what was it?—the darkness.

She put out the lamp.

It did not do to think, nor, for the matter of that, to feel. She gave
up trying to understand herself, and joined the vast armies of the
benighted, who follow neither the heart nor the brain, and march to
their destiny by catch-words. The armies are full of pleasant and pious
folk. But they have yielded to the only enemy that matters—the enemy
within. They have sinned against passion and truth, and vain will be
their strife after virtue. As the years pass, they are censured. Their
pleasantry and their piety show cracks, their wit becomes cynicism,
their unselfishness hypocrisy; they feel and produce discomfort
wherever they go. They have sinned against Eros and against Pallas
Athene, and not by any heavenly intervention, but by the ordinary
course of nature, those allied deities will be avenged.

Lucy entered this army when she pretended to George that she did not
love him, and pretended to Cecil that she loved no one. The night
received her, as it had received Miss Bartlett thirty years before.




Chapter XVIII
Lying to Mr. Beebe, Mrs. Honeychurch, Freddy, and The Servants


Windy Corner lay, not on the summit of the ridge, but a few hundred
feet down the southern slope, at the springing of one of the great
buttresses that supported the hill. On either side of it was a shallow
ravine, filled with ferns and pine-trees, and down the ravine on the
left ran the highway into the Weald.

Whenever Mr. Beebe crossed the ridge and caught sight of these noble
dispositions of the earth, and, poised in the middle of them, Windy
Corner,—he laughed. The situation was so glorious, the house so
commonplace, not to say impertinent. The late Mr. Honeychurch had
affected the cube, because it gave him the most accommodation for his
money, and the only addition made by his widow had been a small turret,
shaped like a rhinoceros’ horn, where she could sit in wet weather and
watch the carts going up and down the road. So impertinent—and yet the
house “did,” for it was the home of people who loved their surroundings
honestly. Other houses in the neighborhood had been built by expensive
architects, over others their inmates had fidgeted sedulously, yet all
these suggested the accidental, the temporary; while Windy Corner
seemed as inevitable as an ugliness of Nature’s own creation. One might
laugh at the house, but one never shuddered. Mr. Beebe was bicycling
over this Monday afternoon with a piece of gossip. He had heard from
the Miss Alans. These admirable ladies, since they could not go to
Cissie Villa, had changed their plans. They were going to Greece
instead.

“Since Florence did my poor sister so much good,” wrote Miss Catharine,
“we do not see why we should not try Athens this winter. Of course,
Athens is a plunge, and the doctor has ordered her special digestive
bread; but, after all, we can take that with us, and it is only getting
first into a steamer and then into a train. But is there an English
Church?” And the letter went on to say: “I do not expect we shall go
any further than Athens, but if you knew of a really comfortable
pension at Constantinople, we should be so grateful.”

Lucy would enjoy this letter, and the smile with which Mr. Beebe
greeted Windy Corner was partly for her. She would see the fun of it,
and some of its beauty, for she must see some beauty. Though she was
hopeless about pictures, and though she dressed so unevenly—oh, that
cerise frock yesterday at church!—she must see some beauty in life, or
she could not play the piano as she did. He had a theory that musicians
are incredibly complex, and know far less than other artists what they
want and what they are; that they puzzle themselves as well as their
friends; that their psychology is a modern development, and has not yet
been understood. This theory, had he known it, had possibly just been
illustrated by facts. Ignorant of the events of yesterday he was only
riding over to get some tea, to see his niece, and to observe whether
Miss Honeychurch saw anything beautiful in the desire of two old ladies
to visit Athens.

A carriage was drawn up outside Windy Corner, and just as he caught
sight of the house it started, bowled up the drive, and stopped
abruptly when it reached the main road. Therefore it must be the horse,
who always expected people to walk up the hill in case they tired him.
The door opened obediently, and two men emerged, whom Mr. Beebe
recognized as Cecil and Freddy. They were an odd couple to go driving;
but he saw a trunk beside the coachman’s legs. Cecil, who wore a
bowler, must be going away, while Freddy (a cap)—was seeing him to the
station. They walked rapidly, taking the short cuts, and reached the
summit while the carriage was still pursuing the windings of the road.

They shook hands with the clergyman, but did not speak.

“So you’re off for a minute, Mr. Vyse?” he asked.

Cecil said, “Yes,” while Freddy edged away.

“I was coming to show you this delightful letter from those friends of
Miss Honeychurch.” He quoted from it. “Isn’t it wonderful? Isn’t it
romance? Most certainly they will go to Constantinople. They are taken
in a snare that cannot fail. They will end by going round the world.”

Cecil listened civilly, and said he was sure that Lucy would be amused
and interested.

“Isn’t Romance capricious! I never notice it in you young people; you
do nothing but play lawn tennis, and say that romance is dead, while
the Miss Alans are struggling with all the weapons of propriety against
the terrible thing. ‘A really comfortable pension at Constantinople!’
So they call it out of decency, but in their hearts they want a pension
with magic windows opening on the foam of perilous seas in fairyland
forlorn! No ordinary view will content the Miss Alans. They want the
Pension Keats.”

“I’m awfully sorry to interrupt, Mr. Beebe,” said Freddy, “but have you
any matches?”

“I have,” said Cecil, and it did not escape Mr. Beebe’s notice that he
spoke to the boy more kindly.

“You have never met these Miss Alans, have you, Mr. Vyse?”

“Never.”

“Then you don’t see the wonder of this Greek visit. I haven’t been to
Greece myself, and don’t mean to go, and I can’t imagine any of my
friends going. It is altogether too big for our little lot. Don’t you
think so? Italy is just about as much as we can manage. Italy is
heroic, but Greece is godlike or devilish—I am not sure which, and in
either case absolutely out of our suburban focus. All right, Freddy—I
am not being clever, upon my word I am not—I took the idea from another
fellow; and give me those matches when you’ve done with them.” He lit a
cigarette, and went on talking to the two young men. “I was saying, if
our poor little Cockney lives must have a background, let it be
Italian. Big enough in all conscience. The ceiling of the Sistine
Chapel for me. There the contrast is just as much as I can realize. But
not the Parthenon, not the frieze of Phidias at any price; and here
comes the victoria.”

“You’re quite right,” said Cecil. “Greece is not for our little lot”;
and he got in. Freddy followed, nodding to the clergyman, whom he
trusted not to be pulling one’s leg, really. And before they had gone a
dozen yards he jumped out, and came running back for Vyse’s match-box,
which had not been returned. As he took it, he said: “I’m so glad you
only talked about books. Cecil’s hard hit. Lucy won’t marry him. If
you’d gone on about her, as you did about them, he might have broken
down.”

“But when—”

“Late last night. I must go.”

“Perhaps they won’t want me down there.”

“No—go on. Good-bye.”

“Thank goodness!” exclaimed Mr. Beebe to himself, and struck the saddle
of his bicycle approvingly, “It was the one foolish thing she ever did.
Oh, what a glorious riddance!” And, after a little thought, he
negotiated the slope into Windy Corner, light of heart. The house was
again as it ought to be—cut off forever from Cecil’s pretentious world.

He would find Miss Minnie down in the garden.

In the drawing-room Lucy was tinkling at a Mozart Sonata. He hesitated
a moment, but went down the garden as requested. There he found a
mournful company. It was a blustering day, and the wind had taken and
broken the dahlias. Mrs. Honeychurch, who looked cross, was tying them
up, while Miss Bartlett, unsuitably dressed, impeded her with offers of
assistance. At a little distance stood Minnie and the “garden-child,” a
minute importation, each holding either end of a long piece of bass.

“Oh, how do you do, Mr. Beebe? Gracious what a mess everything is! Look
at my scarlet pompoms, and the wind blowing your skirts about, and the
ground so hard that not a prop will stick in, and then the carriage
having to go out, when I had counted on having Powell, who—give
everyone their due—does tie up dahlias properly.”

Evidently Mrs. Honeychurch was shattered.

“How do you do?” said Miss Bartlett, with a meaning glance, as though
conveying that more than dahlias had been broken off by the autumn
gales.

“Here, Lennie, the bass,” cried Mrs. Honeychurch. The garden-child, who
did not know what bass was, stood rooted to the path with horror.
Minnie slipped to her uncle and whispered that everyone was very
disagreeable to-day, and that it was not her fault if dahlia-strings
would tear longways instead of across.

“Come for a walk with me,” he told her. “You have worried them as much
as they can stand. Mrs. Honeychurch, I only called in aimlessly. I
shall take her up to tea at the Beehive Tavern, if I may.”

“Oh, must you? Yes do.—Not the scissors, thank you, Charlotte, when
both my hands are full already—I’m perfectly certain that the orange
cactus will go before I can get to it.”

Mr. Beebe, who was an adept at relieving situations, invited Miss
Bartlett to accompany them to this mild festivity.

“Yes, Charlotte, I don’t want you—do go; there’s nothing to stop about
for, either in the house or out of it.”

Miss Bartlett said that her duty lay in the dahlia bed, but when she
had exasperated everyone, except Minnie, by a refusal, she turned round
and exasperated Minnie by an acceptance. As they walked up the garden,
the orange cactus fell, and Mr. Beebe’s last vision was of the
garden-child clasping it like a lover, his dark head buried in a wealth
of blossom.

“It is terrible, this havoc among the flowers,” he remarked.

“It is always terrible when the promise of months is destroyed in a
moment,” enunciated Miss Bartlett.

“Perhaps we ought to send Miss Honeychurch down to her mother. Or will
she come with us?”

“I think we had better leave Lucy to herself, and to her own pursuits.”

“They’re angry with Miss Honeychurch because she was late for
breakfast,” whispered Minnie, “and Floyd has gone, and Mr. Vyse has
gone, and Freddy won’t play with me. In fact, Uncle Arthur, the house
is not _at all_ what it was yesterday.”

“Don’t be a prig,” said her Uncle Arthur. “Go and put on your boots.”

He stepped into the drawing-room, where Lucy was still attentively
pursuing the Sonatas of Mozart. She stopped when he entered.

“How do you do? Miss Bartlett and Minnie are coming with me to tea at
the Beehive. Would you come too?”

“I don’t think I will, thank you.”

“No, I didn’t suppose you would care to much.”

Lucy turned to the piano and struck a few chords.

“How delicate those Sonatas are!” said Mr. Beebe, though at the bottom
of his heart, he thought them silly little things.

Lucy passed into Schumann.

“Miss Honeychurch!”

“Yes.”

“I met them on the hill. Your brother told me.”

“Oh he did?” She sounded annoyed. Mr. Beebe felt hurt, for he had
thought that she would like him to be told.

“I needn’t say that it will go no further.”

“Mother, Charlotte, Cecil, Freddy, you,” said Lucy, playing a note for
each person who knew, and then playing a sixth note.

“If you’ll let me say so, I am very glad, and I am certain that you
have done the right thing.”

“So I hoped other people would think, but they don’t seem to.”

“I could see that Miss Bartlett thought it unwise.”

“So does mother. Mother minds dreadfully.”

“I am very sorry for that,” said Mr. Beebe with feeling.

Mrs. Honeychurch, who hated all changes, did mind, but not nearly as
much as her daughter pretended, and only for the minute. It was really
a ruse of Lucy’s to justify her despondency—a ruse of which she was not
herself conscious, for she was marching in the armies of darkness.

“And Freddy minds.”

“Still, Freddy never hit it off with Vyse much, did he? I gathered that
he disliked the engagement, and felt it might separate him from you.”

“Boys are so odd.”

Minnie could be heard arguing with Miss Bartlett through the floor. Tea
at the Beehive apparently involved a complete change of apparel. Mr.
Beebe saw that Lucy—very properly—did not wish to discuss her action,
so after a sincere expression of sympathy, he said, “I have had an
absurd letter from Miss Alan. That was really what brought me over. I
thought it might amuse you all.”

“How delightful!” said Lucy, in a dull voice.

For the sake of something to do, he began to read her the letter. After
a few words her eyes grew alert, and soon she interrupted him with
“Going abroad? When do they start?”

“Next week, I gather.”

“Did Freddy say whether he was driving straight back?”

“No, he didn’t.”

“Because I do hope he won’t go gossiping.”

So she did want to talk about her broken engagement. Always
complaisant, he put the letter away. But she, at once exclaimed in a
high voice, “Oh, do tell me more about the Miss Alans! How perfectly
splendid of them to go abroad!”

“I want them to start from Venice, and go in a cargo steamer down the
Illyrian coast!”

She laughed heartily. “Oh, delightful! I wish they’d take me.”

“Has Italy filled you with the fever of travel? Perhaps George Emerson
is right. He says that ‘Italy is only an euphuism for Fate.’”

“Oh, not Italy, but Constantinople. I have always longed to go to
Constantinople. Constantinople is practically Asia, isn’t it?”

Mr. Beebe reminded her that Constantinople was still unlikely, and that
the Miss Alans only aimed at Athens, “with Delphi, perhaps, if the
roads are safe.” But this made no difference to her enthusiasm. She had
always longed to go to Greece even more, it seemed. He saw, to his
surprise, that she was apparently serious.

“I didn’t realize that you and the Miss Alans were still such friends,
after Cissie Villa.”

“Oh, that’s nothing; I assure you Cissie Villa’s nothing to me; I would
give anything to go with them.”

“Would your mother spare you again so soon? You have scarcely been home
three months.”

“She _must_ spare me!” cried Lucy, in growing excitement. “I simply
_must_ go away. I have to.” She ran her fingers hysterically through
her hair. “Don’t you see that I _have_ to go away? I didn’t realize at
the time—and of course I want to see Constantinople so particularly.”

“You mean that since you have broken off your engagement you feel—”

“Yes, yes. I knew you’d understand.”

Mr. Beebe did not quite understand. Why could not Miss Honeychurch
repose in the bosom of her family? Cecil had evidently taken up the
dignified line, and was not going to annoy her. Then it struck him that
her family itself might be annoying. He hinted this to her, and she
accepted the hint eagerly.

“Yes, of course; to go to Constantinople until they are used to the
idea and everything has calmed down.”

“I am afraid it has been a bothersome business,” he said gently.

“No, not at all. Cecil was very kind indeed; only—I had better tell you
the whole truth, since you have heard a little—it was that he is so
masterful. I found that he wouldn’t let me go my own way. He would
improve me in places where I can’t be improved. Cecil won’t let a woman
decide for herself—in fact, he daren’t. What nonsense I do talk! But
that is the kind of thing.”

“It is what I gathered from my own observation of Mr. Vyse; it is what
I gather from all that I have known of you. I do sympathize and agree
most profoundly. I agree so much that you must let me make one little
criticism: Is it worth while rushing off to Greece?”

“But I must go somewhere!” she cried. “I have been worrying all the
morning, and here comes the very thing.” She struck her knees with
clenched fists, and repeated: “I must! And the time I shall have with
mother, and all the money she spent on me last spring. You all think
much too highly of me. I wish you weren’t so kind.” At this moment Miss
Bartlett entered, and her nervousness increased. “I must get away, ever
so far. I must know my own mind and where I want to go.”

“Come along; tea, tea, tea,” said Mr. Beebe, and bustled his guests out
of the front-door. He hustled them so quickly that he forgot his hat.
When he returned for it he heard, to his relief and surprise, the
tinkling of a Mozart Sonata.

“She is playing again,” he said to Miss Bartlett.

“Lucy can always play,” was the acid reply.

“One is very thankful that she has such a resource. She is evidently
much worried, as, of course, she ought to be. I know all about it. The
marriage was so near that it must have been a hard struggle before she
could wind herself up to speak.”

Miss Bartlett gave a kind of wriggle, and he prepared for a discussion.
He had never fathomed Miss Bartlett. As he had put it to himself at
Florence, “she might yet reveal depths of strangeness, if not of
meaning.” But she was so unsympathetic that she must be reliable. He
assumed that much, and he had no hesitation in discussing Lucy with
her. Minnie was fortunately collecting ferns.

She opened the discussion with: “We had much better let the matter
drop.”

“I wonder.”

“It is of the highest importance that there should be no gossip in
Summer Street. It would be _death_ to gossip about Mr. Vyse’s dismissal
at the present moment.”

Mr. Beebe raised his eyebrows. Death is a strong word—surely too
strong. There was no question of tragedy. He said: “Of course, Miss
Honeychurch will make the fact public in her own way, and when she
chooses. Freddy only told me because he knew she would not mind.”

“I know,” said Miss Bartlett civilly. “Yet Freddy ought not to have
told even you. One cannot be too careful.”

“Quite so.”

“I do implore absolute secrecy. A chance word to a chattering friend,
and—”

“Exactly.” He was used to these nervous old maids and to the
exaggerated importance that they attach to words. A rector lives in a
web of petty secrets, and confidences and warnings, and the wiser he is
the less he will regard them. He will change the subject, as did Mr.
Beebe, saying cheerfully: “Have you heard from any Bertolini people
lately? I believe you keep up with Miss Lavish. It is odd how we of
that pension, who seemed such a fortuitous collection, have been
working into one another’s lives. Two, three, four, six of us—no,
eight; I had forgotten the Emersons—have kept more or less in touch. We
must really give the Signora a testimonial.”

And, Miss Bartlett not favouring the scheme, they walked up the hill in
a silence which was only broken by the rector naming some fern. On the
summit they paused. The sky had grown wilder since he stood there last
hour, giving to the land a tragic greatness that is rare in Surrey.
Grey clouds were charging across tissues of white, which stretched and
shredded and tore slowly, until through their final layers there
gleamed a hint of the disappearing blue. Summer was retreating. The
wind roared, the trees groaned, yet the noise seemed insufficient for
those vast operations in heaven. The weather was breaking up, breaking,
broken, and it is a sense of the fit rather than of the supernatural
that equips such crises with the salvos of angelic artillery. Mr.
Beebe’s eyes rested on Windy Corner, where Lucy sat, practising Mozart.
No smile came to his lips, and, changing the subject again, he said:
“We shan’t have rain, but we shall have darkness, so let us hurry on.
The darkness last night was appalling.”

They reached the Beehive Tavern at about five o’clock. That amiable
hostelry possesses a verandah, in which the young and the unwise do
dearly love to sit, while guests of more mature years seek a pleasant
sanded room, and have tea at a table comfortably. Mr. Beebe saw that
Miss Bartlett would be cold if she sat out, and that Minnie would be
dull if she sat in, so he proposed a division of forces. They would
hand the child her food through the window. Thus he was incidentally
enabled to discuss the fortunes of Lucy.

“I have been thinking, Miss Bartlett,” he said, “and, unless you very
much object, I would like to reopen that discussion.” She bowed.
“Nothing about the past. I know little and care less about that; I am
absolutely certain that it is to your cousin’s credit. She has acted
loftily and rightly, and it is like her gentle modesty to say that we
think too highly of her. But the future. Seriously, what do you think
of this Greek plan?” He pulled out the letter again. “I don’t know
whether you overheard, but she wants to join the Miss Alans in their
mad career. It’s all—I can’t explain—it’s wrong.”

Miss Bartlett read the letter in silence, laid it down, seemed to
hesitate, and then read it again.

“I can’t see the point of it myself.”

To his astonishment, she replied: “There I cannot agree with you. In it
I spy Lucy’s salvation.”

“Really. Now, why?”

“She wanted to leave Windy Corner.”

“I know—but it seems so odd, so unlike her, so—I was going to
say—selfish.”

“It is natural, surely—after such painful scenes—that she should desire
a change.”

Here, apparently, was one of those points that the male intellect
misses. Mr. Beebe exclaimed: “So she says herself, and since another
lady agrees with her, I must own that I am partially convinced. Perhaps
she must have a change. I have no sisters or—and I don’t understand
these things. But why need she go as far as Greece?”

“You may well ask that,” replied Miss Bartlett, who was evidently
interested, and had almost dropped her evasive manner. “Why Greece?
(What is it, Minnie dear—jam?) Why not Tunbridge Wells? Oh, Mr. Beebe!
I had a long and most unsatisfactory interview with dear Lucy this
morning. I cannot help her. I will say no more. Perhaps I have already
said too much. I am not to talk. I wanted her to spend six months with
me at Tunbridge Wells, and she refused.”

Mr. Beebe poked at a crumb with his knife.

“But my feelings are of no importance. I know too well that I get on
Lucy’s nerves. Our tour was a failure. She wanted to leave Florence,
and when we got to Rome she did not want to be in Rome, and all the
time I felt that I was spending her mother’s money—.”

“Let us keep to the future, though,” interrupted Mr. Beebe. “I want
your advice.”

“Very well,” said Charlotte, with a choky abruptness that was new to
him, though familiar to Lucy. “I for one will help her to go to Greece.
Will you?”

Mr. Beebe considered.

“It is absolutely necessary,” she continued, lowering her veil and
whispering through it with a passion, an intensity, that surprised him.
“I know—I _know_.” The darkness was coming on, and he felt that this
odd woman really did know. “She must not stop here a moment, and we
must keep quiet till she goes. I trust that the servants know nothing.
Afterwards—but I may have said too much already. Only, Lucy and I are
helpless against Mrs. Honeychurch alone. If you help we may succeed.
Otherwise—”

“Otherwise—?”

“Otherwise,” she repeated as if the word held finality.

“Yes, I will help her,” said the clergyman, setting his jaw firm.
“Come, let us go back now, and settle the whole thing up.”

Miss Bartlett burst into florid gratitude. The tavern sign—a beehive
trimmed evenly with bees—creaked in the wind outside as she thanked
him. Mr. Beebe did not quite understand the situation; but then, he did
not desire to understand it, nor to jump to the conclusion of “another
man” that would have attracted a grosser mind. He only felt that Miss
Bartlett knew of some vague influence from which the girl desired to be
delivered, and which might well be clothed in the fleshly form. Its
very vagueness spurred him into knight-errantry. His belief in
celibacy, so reticent, so carefully concealed beneath his tolerance and
culture, now came to the surface and expanded like some delicate
flower. “They that marry do well, but they that refrain do better.” So
ran his belief, and he never heard that an engagement was broken off
but with a slight feeling of pleasure. In the case of Lucy, the feeling
was intensified through dislike of Cecil; and he was willing to go
further—to place her out of danger until she could confirm her
resolution of virginity. The feeling was very subtle and quite
undogmatic, and he never imparted it to any other of the characters in
this entanglement. Yet it existed, and it alone explains his action
subsequently, and his influence on the action of others. The compact
that he made with Miss Bartlett in the tavern, was to help not only
Lucy, but religion also.

They hurried home through a world of black and grey. He conversed on
indifferent topics: the Emersons’ need of a housekeeper; servants;
Italian servants; novels about Italy; novels with a purpose; could
literature influence life? Windy Corner glimmered. In the garden, Mrs.
Honeychurch, now helped by Freddy, still wrestled with the lives of her
flowers.

“It gets too dark,” she said hopelessly. “This comes of putting off. We
might have known the weather would break up soon; and now Lucy wants to
go to Greece. I don’t know what the world’s coming to.”

“Mrs. Honeychurch,” he said, “go to Greece she must. Come up to the
house and let’s talk it over. Do you, in the first place, mind her
breaking with Vyse?”

“Mr. Beebe, I’m thankful—simply thankful.”

“So am I,” said Freddy.

“Good. Now come up to the house.”

They conferred in the dining-room for half an hour.

Lucy would never have carried the Greek scheme alone. It was expensive
and dramatic—both qualities that her mother loathed. Nor would
Charlotte have succeeded. The honours of the day rested with Mr. Beebe.
By his tact and common sense, and by his influence as a clergyman—for a
clergyman who was not a fool influenced Mrs. Honeychurch greatly—he
bent her to their purpose, “I don’t see why Greece is necessary,” she
said; “but as you do, I suppose it is all right. It must be something I
can’t understand. Lucy! Let’s tell her. Lucy!”

“She is playing the piano,” Mr. Beebe said. He opened the door, and
heard the words of a song:

“Look not thou on beauty’s charming.”


“I didn’t know that Miss Honeychurch sang, too.”

“Sit thou still when kings are arming,
Taste not when the wine-cup glistens——”


“It’s a song that Cecil gave her. How odd girls are!”

“What’s that?” called Lucy, stopping short.

“All right, dear,” said Mrs. Honeychurch kindly. She went into the
drawing-room, and Mr. Beebe heard her kiss Lucy and say: “I am sorry I
was so cross about Greece, but it came on the top of the dahlias.”

Rather a hard voice said: “Thank you, mother; that doesn’t matter a
bit.”

“And you are right, too—Greece will be all right; you can go if the
Miss Alans will have you.”

“Oh, splendid! Oh, thank you!”

Mr. Beebe followed. Lucy still sat at the piano with her hands over the
keys. She was glad, but he had expected greater gladness. Her mother
bent over her. Freddy, to whom she had been singing, reclined on the
floor with his head against her, and an unlit pipe between his lips.
Oddly enough, the group was beautiful. Mr. Beebe, who loved the art of
the past, was reminded of a favourite theme, the _Santa Conversazione_,
in which people who care for one another are painted chatting together
about noble things—a theme neither sensual nor sensational, and
therefore ignored by the art of to-day. Why should Lucy want either to
marry or to travel when she had such friends at home?

“Taste not when the wine-cup glistens,
Speak not when the people listens,”


she continued.

“Here’s Mr. Beebe.”

“Mr. Beebe knows my rude ways.”

“It’s a beautiful song and a wise one,” said he. “Go on.”

“It isn’t very good,” she said listlessly. “I forget why—harmony or
something.”

“I suspected it was unscholarly. It’s so beautiful.”

“The tune’s right enough,” said Freddy, “but the words are rotten. Why
throw up the sponge?”

“How stupidly you talk!” said his sister. The _Santa Conversazione_ was
broken up. After all, there was no reason that Lucy should talk about
Greece or thank him for persuading her mother, so he said good-bye.

Freddy lit his bicycle lamp for him in the porch, and with his usual
felicity of phrase, said: “This has been a day and a half.”

“Stop thine ear against the singer—”


“Wait a minute; she is finishing.”

“From the red gold keep thy finger;
Vacant heart and hand and eye
Easy live and quiet die.”


“I love weather like this,” said Freddy.

Mr. Beebe passed into it.

The two main facts were clear. She had behaved splendidly, and he had
helped her. He could not expect to master the details of so big a
change in a girl’s life. If here and there he was dissatisfied or
puzzled, he must acquiesce; she was choosing the better part.

“Vacant heart and hand and eye—”


Perhaps the song stated “the better part” rather too strongly. He half
fancied that the soaring accompaniment—which he did not lose in the
shout of the gale—really agreed with Freddy, and was gently criticizing
the words that it adorned:

“Vacant heart and hand and eye
Easy live and quiet die.”


However, for the fourth time Windy Corner lay poised below him—now as a
beacon in the roaring tides of darkness.




Chapter XIX
Lying to Mr. Emerson


The Miss Alans were found in their beloved temperance hotel near
Bloomsbury—a clean, airless establishment much patronized by provincial
England. They always perched there before crossing the great seas, and
for a week or two would fidget gently over clothes, guide-books,
mackintosh squares, digestive bread, and other Continental necessaries.
That there are shops abroad, even in Athens, never occurred to them,
for they regarded travel as a species of warfare, only to be undertaken
by those who have been fully armed at the Haymarket Stores. Miss
Honeychurch, they trusted, would take care to equip herself duly.
Quinine could now be obtained in tabloids; paper soap was a great help
towards freshening up one’s face in the train. Lucy promised, a little
depressed.

“But, of course, you know all about these things, and you have Mr. Vyse
to help you. A gentleman is such a stand-by.”

Mrs. Honeychurch, who had come up to town with her daughter, began to
drum nervously upon her card-case.

“We think it so good of Mr. Vyse to spare you,” Miss Catharine
continued. “It is not every young man who would be so unselfish. But
perhaps he will come out and join you later on.”

“Or does his work keep him in London?” said Miss Teresa, the more acute
and less kindly of the two sisters.

“However, we shall see him when he sees you off. I do so long to see
him.”

“No one will see Lucy off,” interposed Mrs. Honeychurch. “She doesn’t
like it.”

“No, I hate seeings-off,” said Lucy.

“Really? How funny! I should have thought that in this case—”

“Oh, Mrs. Honeychurch, you aren’t going? It is such a pleasure to have
met you!”

They escaped, and Lucy said with relief: “That’s all right. We just got
through that time.”

But her mother was annoyed. “I should be told, dear, that I am
unsympathetic. But I cannot see why you didn’t tell your friends about
Cecil and be done with it. There all the time we had to sit fencing,
and almost telling lies, and be seen through, too, I dare say, which is
most unpleasant.”

Lucy had plenty to say in reply. She described the Miss Alans’
character: they were such gossips, and if one told them, the news would
be everywhere in no time.

“But why shouldn’t it be everywhere in no time?”

“Because I settled with Cecil not to announce it until I left England.
I shall tell them then. It’s much pleasanter. How wet it is! Let’s turn
in here.”

“Here” was the British Museum. Mrs. Honeychurch refused. If they must
take shelter, let it be in a shop. Lucy felt contemptuous, for she was
on the tack of caring for Greek sculpture, and had already borrowed a
mythical dictionary from Mr. Beebe to get up the names of the goddesses
and gods.

“Oh, well, let it be shop, then. Let’s go to Mudie’s. I’ll buy a
guide-book.”

“You know, Lucy, you and Charlotte and Mr. Beebe all tell me I’m so
stupid, so I suppose I am, but I shall never understand this
hole-and-corner work. You’ve got rid of Cecil—well and good, and I’m
thankful he’s gone, though I did feel angry for the minute. But why not
announce it? Why this hushing up and tip-toeing?”

“It’s only for a few days.”

“But why at all?”

Lucy was silent. She was drifting away from her mother. It was quite
easy to say, “Because George Emerson has been bothering me, and if he
hears I’ve given up Cecil may begin again”—quite easy, and it had the
incidental advantage of being true. But she could not say it. She
disliked confidences, for they might lead to self-knowledge and to that
king of terrors—Light. Ever since that last evening at Florence she had
deemed it unwise to reveal her soul.

Mrs. Honeychurch, too, was silent. She was thinking, “My daughter won’t
answer me; she would rather be with those inquisitive old maids than
with Freddy and me. Any rag, tag, and bobtail apparently does if she
can leave her home.” And as in her case thoughts never remained
unspoken long, she burst out with: “You’re tired of Windy Corner.”

This was perfectly true. Lucy had hoped to return to Windy Corner when
she escaped from Cecil, but she discovered that her home existed no
longer. It might exist for Freddy, who still lived and thought
straight, but not for one who had deliberately warped the brain. She
did not acknowledge that her brain was warped, for the brain itself
must assist in that acknowledgment, and she was disordering the very
instruments of life. She only felt, “I do not love George; I broke off
my engagement because I did not love George; I must go to Greece
because I do not love George; it is more important that I should look
up gods in the dictionary than that I should help my mother; everyone
else is behaving very badly.” She only felt irritable and petulant, and
anxious to do what she was not expected to do, and in this spirit she
proceeded with the conversation.

“Oh, mother, what rubbish you talk! Of course I’m not tired of Windy
Corner.”

“Then why not say so at once, instead of considering half an hour?”

She laughed faintly, “Half a _minute_ would be nearer.”

“Perhaps you would like to stay away from your home altogether?”

“Hush, mother! People will hear you”; for they had entered Mudie’s. She
bought Baedeker, and then continued: “Of course I want to live at home;
but as we are talking about it, I may as well say that I shall want to
be away in the future more than I have been. You see, I come into my
money next year.”

Tears came into her mother’s eyes.

Driven by nameless bewilderment, by what is in older people termed
“eccentricity,” Lucy determined to make this point clear. “I’ve seen
the world so little—I felt so out of things in Italy. I have seen so
little of life; one ought to come up to London more—not a cheap ticket
like to-day, but to stop. I might even share a flat for a little with
some other girl.”

“And mess with typewriters and latch-keys,” exploded Mrs. Honeychurch.
“And agitate and scream, and be carried off kicking by the police. And
call it a Mission—when no one wants you! And call it Duty—when it means
that you can’t stand your own home! And call it Work—when thousands of
men are starving with the competition as it is! And then to prepare
yourself, find two doddering old ladies, and go abroad with them.”

“I want more independence,” said Lucy lamely; she knew that she wanted
something, and independence is a useful cry; we can always say that we
have not got it. She tried to remember her emotions in Florence: those
had been sincere and passionate, and had suggested beauty rather than
short skirts and latch-keys. But independence was certainly her cue.

“Very well. Take your independence and be gone. Rush up and down and
round the world, and come back as thin as a lath with the bad food.
Despise the house that your father built and the garden that he
planted, and our dear view—and then share a flat with another girl.”

Lucy screwed up her mouth and said: “Perhaps I spoke hastily.”

“Oh, goodness!” her mother flashed. “How you do remind me of Charlotte
Bartlett!”

“_Charlotte?_” flashed Lucy in her turn, pierced at last by a vivid
pain.

“More every moment.”

“I don’t know what you mean, mother; Charlotte and I are not the very
least alike.”

“Well, I see the likeness. The same eternal worrying, the same taking
back of words. You and Charlotte trying to divide two apples among
three people last night might be sisters.”

“What rubbish! And if you dislike Charlotte so, it’s rather a pity you
asked her to stop. I warned you about her; I begged you, implored you
not to, but of course it was not listened to.”

“There you go.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Charlotte again, my dear; that’s all; her very words.”

Lucy clenched her teeth. “My point is that you oughtn’t to have asked
Charlotte to stop. I wish you would keep to the point.” And the
conversation died off into a wrangle.

She and her mother shopped in silence, spoke little in the train,
little again in the carriage, which met them at Dorking Station. It had
poured all day and as they ascended through the deep Surrey lanes
showers of water fell from the over-hanging beech-trees and rattled on
the hood. Lucy complained that the hood was stuffy. Leaning forward,
she looked out into the steaming dusk, and watched the carriage-lamp
pass like a search-light over mud and leaves, and reveal nothing
beautiful. “The crush when Charlotte gets in will be abominable,” she
remarked. For they were to pick up Miss Bartlett at Summer Street,
where she had been dropped as the carriage went down, to pay a call on
Mr. Beebe’s old mother. “We shall have to sit three a side, because the
trees drop, and yet it isn’t raining. Oh, for a little air!” Then she
listened to the horse’s hoofs—“He has not told—he has not told.” That
melody was blurred by the soft road. “_Can’t_ we have the hood down?”
she demanded, and her mother, with sudden tenderness, said: “Very well,
old lady, stop the horse.” And the horse was stopped, and Lucy and
Powell wrestled with the hood, and squirted water down Mrs.
Honeychurch’s neck. But now that the hood was down, she did see
something that she would have missed—there were no lights in the
windows of Cissie Villa, and round the garden gate she fancied she saw
a padlock.

“Is that house to let again, Powell?” she called.

“Yes, miss,” he replied.

“Have they gone?”

“It is too far out of town for the young gentleman, and his father’s
rheumatism has come on, so he can’t stop on alone, so they are trying
to let furnished,” was the answer.

“They have gone, then?”

“Yes, miss, they have gone.”

Lucy sank back. The carriage stopped at the Rectory. She got out to
call for Miss Bartlett. So the Emersons had gone, and all this bother
about Greece had been unnecessary. Waste! That word seemed to sum up
the whole of life. Wasted plans, wasted money, wasted love, and she had
wounded her mother. Was it possible that she had muddled things away?
Quite possible. Other people had. When the maid opened the door, she
was unable to speak, and stared stupidly into the hall.

Miss Bartlett at once came forward, and after a long preamble asked a
great favour: might she go to church? Mr. Beebe and his mother had
already gone, but she had refused to start until she obtained her
hostess’s full sanction, for it would mean keeping the horse waiting a
good ten minutes more.

“Certainly,” said the hostess wearily. “I forgot it was Friday. Let’s
all go. Powell can go round to the stables.”

“Lucy dearest—”

“No church for me, thank you.”

A sigh, and they departed. The church was invisible, but up in the
darkness to the left there was a hint of colour. This was a stained
window, through which some feeble light was shining, and when the door
opened Lucy heard Mr. Beebe’s voice running through the litany to a
minute congregation. Even their church, built upon the slope of the
hill so artfully, with its beautiful raised transept and its spire of
silvery shingle—even their church had lost its charm; and the thing one
never talked about—religion—was fading like all the other things.

She followed the maid into the Rectory.

Would she object to sitting in Mr. Beebe’s study? There was only that
one fire.

She would not object.

Some one was there already, for Lucy heard the words: “A lady to wait,
sir.”

Old Mr. Emerson was sitting by the fire, with his foot upon a
gout-stool.

“Oh, Miss Honeychurch, that you should come!” he quavered; and Lucy saw
an alteration in him since last Sunday.

Not a word would come to her lips. George she had faced, and could have
faced again, but she had forgotten how to treat his father.

“Miss Honeychurch, dear, we are so sorry! George is so sorry! He
thought he had a right to try. I cannot blame my boy, and yet I wish he
had told me first. He ought not to have tried. I knew nothing about it
at all.”

If only she could remember how to behave!

He held up his hand. “But you must not scold him.”

Lucy turned her back, and began to look at Mr. Beebe’s books.

“I taught him,” he quavered, “to trust in love. I said: ‘When love
comes, that is reality.’ I said: ‘Passion does not blind. No. Passion
is sanity, and the woman you love, she is the only person you will ever
really understand.’” He sighed: “True, everlastingly true, though my
day is over, and though there is the result. Poor boy! He is so sorry!
He said he knew it was madness when you brought your cousin in; that
whatever you felt you did not mean. Yet”—his voice gathered strength:
he spoke out to make certain—“Miss Honeychurch, do you remember Italy?”

Lucy selected a book—a volume of Old Testament commentaries. Holding it
up to her eyes, she said: “I have no wish to discuss Italy or any
subject connected with your son.”

“But you do remember it?”

“He has misbehaved himself from the first.”

“I only was told that he loved you last Sunday. I never could judge
behaviour. I—I—suppose he has.”

Feeling a little steadier, she put the book back and turned round to
him. His face was drooping and swollen, but his eyes, though they were
sunken deep, gleamed with a child’s courage.

“Why, he has behaved abominably,” she said. “I am glad he is sorry. Do
you know what he did?”

“Not ‘abominably,’” was the gentle correction. “He only tried when he
should not have tried. You have all you want, Miss Honeychurch: you are
going to marry the man you love. Do not go out of George’s life saying
he is abominable.”

“No, of course,” said Lucy, ashamed at the reference to Cecil.
“‘Abominable’ is much too strong. I am sorry I used it about your son.
I think I will go to church, after all. My mother and my cousin have
gone. I shall not be so very late—”

“Especially as he has gone under,” he said quietly.

“What was that?”

“Gone under naturally.” He beat his palms together in silence; his head
fell on his chest.

“I don’t understand.”

“As his mother did.”

“But, Mr. Emerson—_Mr. Emerson_—what are you talking about?”

“When I wouldn’t have George baptized,” said he.

Lucy was frightened.

“And she agreed that baptism was nothing, but he caught that fever when
he was twelve and she turned round. She thought it a judgement.” He
shuddered. “Oh, horrible, when we had given up that sort of thing and
broken away from her parents. Oh, horrible—worst of all—worse than
death, when you have made a little clearing in the wilderness, planted
your little garden, let in your sunlight, and then the weeds creep in
again! A judgement! And our boy had typhoid because no clergyman had
dropped water on him in church! Is it possible, Miss Honeychurch? Shall
we slip back into the darkness for ever?”

“I don’t know,” gasped Lucy. “I don’t understand this sort of thing. I
was not meant to understand it.”

“But Mr. Eager—he came when I was out, and acted according to his
principles. I don’t blame him or any one... but by the time George was
well she was ill. He made her think about sin, and she went under
thinking about it.”

It was thus that Mr. Emerson had murdered his wife in the sight of God.

“Oh, how terrible!” said Lucy, forgetting her own affairs at last.

“He was not baptized,” said the old man. “I did hold firm.” And he
looked with unwavering eyes at the rows of books, as if—at what
cost!—he had won a victory over them. “My boy shall go back to the
earth untouched.”

She asked whether young Mr. Emerson was ill.

“Oh—last Sunday.” He started into the present. “George last Sunday—no,
not ill: just gone under. He is never ill. But he is his mother’s son.
Her eyes were his, and she had that forehead that I think so beautiful,
and he will not think it worth while to live. It was always touch and
go. He will live; but he will not think it worth while to live. He will
never think anything worth while. You remember that church at
Florence?”

Lucy did remember, and how she had suggested that George should collect
postage stamps.

“After you left Florence—horrible. Then we took the house here, and he
goes bathing with your brother, and became better. You saw him
bathing?”

“I am so sorry, but it is no good discussing this affair. I am deeply
sorry about it.”

“Then there came something about a novel. I didn’t follow it at all; I
had to hear so much, and he minded telling me; he finds me too old. Ah,
well, one must have failures. George comes down to-morrow, and takes me
up to his London rooms. He can’t bear to be about here, and I must be
where he is.”

“Mr. Emerson,” cried the girl, “don’t leave at least, not on my
account. I am going to Greece. Don’t leave your comfortable house.”

It was the first time her voice had been kind and he smiled. “How good
everyone is! And look at Mr. Beebe housing me—came over this morning
and heard I was going! Here I am so comfortable with a fire.”

“Yes, but you won’t go back to London. It’s absurd.”

“I must be with George; I must make him care to live, and down here he
can’t. He says the thought of seeing you and of hearing about you—I am
not justifying him: I am only saying what has happened.”

“Oh, Mr. Emerson”—she took hold of his hand—“you mustn’t. I’ve been
bother enough to the world by now. I can’t have you moving out of your
house when you like it, and perhaps losing money through it—all on my
account. You must stop! I am just going to Greece.”

“All the way to Greece?”

Her manner altered.

“To Greece?”

“So you must stop. You won’t talk about this business, I know. I can
trust you both.”

“Certainly you can. We either have you in our lives, or leave you to
the life that you have chosen.”

“I shouldn’t want—”

“I suppose Mr. Vyse is very angry with George? No, it was wrong of
George to try. We have pushed our beliefs too far. I fancy that we
deserve sorrow.”

She looked at the books again—black, brown, and that acrid theological
blue. They surrounded the visitors on every side; they were piled on
the tables, they pressed against the very ceiling. To Lucy who could
not see that Mr. Emerson was profoundly religious, and differed from
Mr. Beebe chiefly by his acknowledgment of passion—it seemed dreadful
that the old man should crawl into such a sanctum, when he was unhappy,
and be dependent on the bounty of a clergyman.

More certain than ever that she was tired, he offered her his chair.

“No, please sit still. I think I will sit in the carriage.”

“Miss Honeychurch, you do sound tired.”

“Not a bit,” said Lucy, with trembling lips.

“But you are, and there’s a look of George about you. And what were you
saying about going abroad?”

She was silent.

“Greece”—and she saw that he was thinking the word over—“Greece; but
you were to be married this year, I thought.”

“Not till January, it wasn’t,” said Lucy, clasping her hands. Would she
tell an actual lie when it came to the point?

“I suppose that Mr. Vyse is going with you. I hope—it isn’t because
George spoke that you are both going?”

“No.”

“I hope that you will enjoy Greece with Mr. Vyse.”

“Thank you.”

At that moment Mr. Beebe came back from church. His cassock was covered
with rain. “That’s all right,” he said kindly. “I counted on you two
keeping each other company. It’s pouring again. The entire
congregation, which consists of your cousin, your mother, and my
mother, stands waiting in the church, till the carriage fetches it. Did
Powell go round?”

“I think so; I’ll see.”

“No—of course, I’ll see. How are the Miss Alans?”

“Very well, thank you.”

“Did you tell Mr. Emerson about Greece?”

“I—I did.”

“Don’t you think it very plucky of her, Mr. Emerson, to undertake the
two Miss Alans? Now, Miss Honeychurch, go back—keep warm. I think three
is such a courageous number to go travelling.” And he hurried off to
the stables.

“He is not going,” she said hoarsely. “I made a slip. Mr. Vyse does
stop behind in England.”

Somehow it was impossible to cheat this old man. To George, to Cecil,
she would have lied again; but he seemed so near the end of things, so
dignified in his approach to the gulf, of which he gave one account,
and the books that surrounded him another, so mild to the rough paths
that he had traversed, that the true chivalry—not the worn-out chivalry
of sex, but the true chivalry that all the young may show to all the
old—awoke in her, and, at whatever risk, she told him that Cecil was
not her companion to Greece. And she spoke so seriously that the risk
became a certainty, and he, lifting his eyes, said: “You are leaving
him? You are leaving the man you love?”

“I—I had to.”

“Why, Miss Honeychurch, why?”

Terror came over her, and she lied again. She made the long, convincing
speech that she had made to Mr. Beebe, and intended to make to the
world when she announced that her engagement was no more. He heard her
in silence, and then said: “My dear, I am worried about you. It seems
to me”—dreamily; she was not alarmed—“that you are in a muddle.”

She shook her head.

“Take an old man’s word; there’s nothing worse than a muddle in all the
world. It is easy to face Death and Fate, and the things that sound so
dreadful. It is on my muddles that I look back with horror—on the
things that I might have avoided. We can help one another but little. I
used to think I could teach young people the whole of life, but I know
better now, and all my teaching of George has come down to this: beware
of muddle. Do you remember in that church, when you pretended to be
annoyed with me and weren’t? Do you remember before, when you refused
the room with the view? Those were muddles—little, but ominous—and I am
fearing that you are in one now.” She was silent. “Don’t trust me, Miss
Honeychurch. Though life is very glorious, it is difficult.” She was
still silent. “‘Life’ wrote a friend of mine, ‘is a public performance
on the violin, in which you must learn the instrument as you go along.’
I think he puts it well. Man has to pick up the use of his functions as
he goes along—especially the function of Love.” Then he burst out
excitedly; “That’s it; that’s what I mean. You love George!” And after
his long preamble, the three words burst against Lucy like waves from
the open sea.

“But you do,” he went on, not waiting for contradiction. “You love the
boy body and soul, plainly, directly, as he loves you, and no other
word expresses it. You won’t marry the other man for his sake.”

“How dare you!” gasped Lucy, with the roaring of waters in her ears.
“Oh, how like a man!—I mean, to suppose that a woman is always thinking
about a man.”

“But you are.”

She summoned physical disgust.

“You’re shocked, but I mean to shock you. It’s the only hope at times.
I can reach you no other way. You must marry, or your life will be
wasted. You have gone too far to retreat. I have no time for the
tenderness, and the comradeship, and the poetry, and the things that
really matter, and _for which_ you marry. I know that, with George, you
will find them, and that you love him. Then be his wife. He is already
part of you. Though you fly to Greece, and never see him again, or
forget his very name, George will work in your thoughts till you die.
It isn’t possible to love and to part. You will wish that it was. You
can transmute love, ignore it, muddle it, but you can never pull it out
of you. I know by experience that the poets are right: love is
eternal.”

Lucy began to cry with anger, and though her anger passed away soon,
her tears remained.

“I only wish poets would say this, too: love is of the body; not the
body, but of the body. Ah! the misery that would be saved if we
confessed that! Ah! for a little directness to liberate the soul! Your
soul, dear Lucy! I hate the word now, because of all the cant with
which superstition has wrapped it round. But we have souls. I cannot
say how they came nor whither they go, but we have them, and I see you
ruining yours. I cannot bear it. It is again the darkness creeping in;
it is hell.” Then he checked himself. “What nonsense I have talked—how
abstract and remote! And I have made you cry! Dear girl, forgive my
prosiness; marry my boy. When I think what life is, and how seldom love
is answered by love—Marry him; it is one of the moments for which the
world was made.”

She could not understand him; the words were indeed remote. Yet as he
spoke the darkness was withdrawn, veil after veil, and she saw to the
bottom of her soul.

“Then, Lucy—”

“You’ve frightened me,” she moaned. “Cecil—Mr. Beebe—the ticket’s
bought—everything.” She fell sobbing into the chair. “I’m caught in the
tangle. I must suffer and grow old away from him. I cannot break the
whole of life for his sake. They trusted me.”

A carriage drew up at the front-door.

“Give George my love—once only. Tell him ‘muddle.’” Then she arranged
her veil, while the tears poured over her cheeks inside.

“Lucy—”

“No—they are in the hall—oh, please not, Mr. Emerson—they trust me—”

“But why should they, when you have deceived them?”

Mr. Beebe opened the door, saying: “Here’s my mother.”

“You’re not worthy of their trust.”

“What’s that?” said Mr. Beebe sharply.

“I was saying, why should you trust her when she deceived you?”

“One minute, mother.” He came in and shut the door.

“I don’t follow you, Mr. Emerson. To whom do you refer? Trust whom?”

“I mean she has pretended to you that she did not love George. They
have loved one another all along.”

Mr. Beebe looked at the sobbing girl. He was very quiet, and his white
face, with its ruddy whiskers, seemed suddenly inhuman. A long black
column, he stood and awaited her reply.

“I shall never marry him,” quavered Lucy.

A look of contempt came over him, and he said, “Why not?”

“Mr. Beebe—I have misled you—I have misled myself—”

“Oh, rubbish, Miss Honeychurch!”

“It is not rubbish!” said the old man hotly. “It’s the part of people
that you don’t understand.”

Mr. Beebe laid his hand on the old man’s shoulder pleasantly.

“Lucy! Lucy!” called voices from the carriage.

“Mr. Beebe, could you help me?”

He looked amazed at the request, and said in a low, stern voice: “I am
more grieved than I can possibly express. It is lamentable,
lamentable—incredible.”

“What’s wrong with the boy?” fired up the other again.

“Nothing, Mr. Emerson, except that he no longer interests me. Marry
George, Miss Honeychurch. He will do admirably.”

He walked out and left them. They heard him guiding his mother
up-stairs.

“Lucy!” the voices called.

She turned to Mr. Emerson in despair. But his face revived her. It was
the face of a saint who understood.

“Now it is all dark. Now Beauty and Passion seem never to have existed.
I know. But remember the mountains over Florence and the view. Ah,
dear, if I were George, and gave you one kiss, it would make you brave.
You have to go cold into a battle that needs warmth, out into the
muddle that you have made yourself; and your mother and all your
friends will despise you, oh, my darling, and rightly, if it is ever
right to despise. George still dark, all the tussle and the misery
without a word from him. Am I justified?” Into his own eyes tears came.
“Yes, for we fight for more than Love or Pleasure; there is Truth.
Truth counts, Truth does count.”

“You kiss me,” said the girl. “You kiss me. I will try.”

He gave her a sense of deities reconciled, a feeling that, in gaining
the man she loved, she would gain something for the whole world.
Throughout the squalor of her homeward drive—she spoke at once—his
salutation remained. He had robbed the body of its taint, the world’s
taunts of their sting; he had shown her the holiness of direct desire.
She “never exactly understood,” she would say in after years, “how he
managed to strengthen her. It was as if he had made her see the whole
of everything at once.”




Chapter XX
The End of the Middle Ages


The Miss Alans did go to Greece, but they went by themselves. They
alone of this little company will double Malea and plough the waters of
the Saronic gulf. They alone will visit Athens and Delphi, and either
shrine of intellectual song—that upon the Acropolis, encircled by blue
seas; that under Parnassus, where the eagles build and the bronze
charioteer drives undismayed towards infinity. Trembling, anxious,
cumbered with much digestive bread, they did proceed to Constantinople,
they did go round the world. The rest of us must be contented with a
fair, but a less arduous, goal. Italiam petimus: we return to the
Pension Bertolini.

George said it was his old room.

“No, it isn’t,” said Lucy; “because it is the room I had, and I had
your father’s room. I forget why; Charlotte made me, for some reason.”

He knelt on the tiled floor, and laid his face in her lap.

“George, you baby, get up.”

“Why shouldn’t I be a baby?” murmured George.

Unable to answer this question, she put down his sock, which she was
trying to mend, and gazed out through the window. It was evening and
again the spring.

“Oh, bother Charlotte,” she said thoughtfully. “What can such people be
made of?”

“Same stuff as parsons are made of.”

“Nonsense!”

“Quite right. It is nonsense.”

“Now you get up off the cold floor, or you’ll be starting rheumatism
next, and you stop laughing and being so silly.”

“Why shouldn’t I laugh?” he asked, pinning her with his elbows, and
advancing his face to hers. “What’s there to cry at? Kiss me here.” He
indicated the spot where a kiss would be welcome.

He was a boy after all. When it came to the point, it was she who
remembered the past, she into whose soul the iron had entered, she who
knew whose room this had been last year. It endeared him to her
strangely that he should be sometimes wrong.

“Any letters?” he asked.

“Just a line from Freddy.”

“Now kiss me here; then here.”

Then, threatened again with rheumatism, he strolled to the window,
opened it (as the English will), and leant out. There was the parapet,
there the river, there to the left the beginnings of the hills. The
cab-driver, who at once saluted him with the hiss of a serpent, might
be that very Phaethon who had set this happiness in motion twelve
months ago. A passion of gratitude—all feelings grow to passions in the
South—came over the husband, and he blessed the people and the things
who had taken so much trouble about a young fool. He had helped
himself, it is true, but how stupidly!

All the fighting that mattered had been done by others—by Italy, by his
father, by his wife.

“Lucy, you come and look at the cypresses; and the church, whatever its
name is, still shows.”

“San Miniato. I’ll just finish your sock.”

“Signorino, domani faremo uno giro,” called the cabman, with engaging
certainty.

George told him that he was mistaken; they had no money to throw away
on driving.

And the people who had not meant to help—the Miss Lavishes, the Cecils,
the Miss Bartletts! Ever prone to magnify Fate, George counted up the
forces that had swept him into this contentment.

“Anything good in Freddy’s letter?”

“Not yet.”

His own content was absolute, but hers held bitterness: the
Honeychurches had not forgiven them; they were disgusted at her past
hypocrisy; she had alienated Windy Corner, perhaps for ever.

“What does he say?”

“Silly boy! He thinks he’s being dignified. He knew we should go off in
the spring—he has known it for six months—that if mother wouldn’t give
her consent we should take the thing into our own hands. They had fair
warning, and now he calls it an elopement. Ridiculous boy—”

“Signorino, domani faremo uno giro—”

“But it will all come right in the end. He has to build us both up from
the beginning again. I wish, though, that Cecil had not turned so
cynical about women. He has, for the second time, quite altered. Why
will men have theories about women? I haven’t any about men. I wish,
too, that Mr. Beebe—”

“You may well wish that.”

“He will never forgive us—I mean, he will never be interested in us
again. I wish that he did not influence them so much at Windy Corner. I
wish he hadn’t—But if we act the truth, the people who really love us
are sure to come back to us in the long run.”

“Perhaps.” Then he said more gently: “Well, I acted the truth—the only
thing I did do—and you came back to me. So possibly you know.” He
turned back into the room. “Nonsense with that sock.” He carried her to
the window, so that she, too, saw all the view. They sank upon their
knees, invisible from the road, they hoped, and began to whisper one
another’s names. Ah! it was worth while; it was the great joy that they
had expected, and countless little joys of which they had never dreamt.
They were silent.

“Signorino, domani faremo—”

“Oh, bother that man!”

But Lucy remembered the vendor of photographs and said, “No, don’t be
rude to him.” Then with a catching of her breath, she murmured: “Mr.
Eager and Charlotte, dreadful frozen Charlotte. How cruel she would be
to a man like that!”

“Look at the lights going over the bridge.”

“But this room reminds me of Charlotte. How horrible to grow old in
Charlotte’s way! To think that evening at the rectory that she
shouldn’t have heard your father was in the house. For she would have
stopped me going in, and he was the only person alive who could have
made me see sense. You couldn’t have made me. When I am very happy”—she
kissed him—“I remember on how little it all hangs. If Charlotte had
only known, she would have stopped me going in, and I should have gone
to silly Greece, and become different for ever.”

“But she did know,” said George; “she did see my father, surely. He
said so.”

“Oh, no, she didn’t see him. She was upstairs with old Mrs. Beebe,
don’t you remember, and then went straight to the church. She said so.”

George was obstinate again. “My father,” said he, “saw her, and I
prefer his word. He was dozing by the study fire, and he opened his
eyes, and there was Miss Bartlett. A few minutes before you came in.
She was turning to go as he woke up. He didn’t speak to her.”

Then they spoke of other things—the desultory talk of those who have
been fighting to reach one another, and whose reward is to rest quietly
in each other’s arms. It was long ere they returned to Miss Bartlett,
but when they did her behaviour seemed more interesting. George, who
disliked any darkness, said: “It’s clear that she knew. Then, why did
she risk the meeting? She knew he was there, and yet she went to
church.”

They tried to piece the thing together.

As they talked, an incredible solution came into Lucy’s mind. She
rejected it, and said: “How like Charlotte to undo her work by a feeble
muddle at the last moment.” But something in the dying evening, in the
roar of the river, in their very embrace warned them that her words
fell short of life, and George whispered: “Or did she mean it?”

“Mean what?”

“Signorino, domani faremo uno giro—”

Lucy bent forward and said with gentleness: “Lascia, prego, lascia.
Siamo sposati.”

“Scusi tanto, signora,” he replied in tones as gentle and whipped up
his horse.

“Buona sera—e grazie.”

“Niente.”

The cabman drove away singing.

“Mean what, George?”

He whispered: “Is it this? Is this possible? I’ll put a marvel to you.
That your cousin has always hoped. That from the very first moment we
met, she hoped, far down in her mind, that we should be like this—of
course, very far down. That she fought us on the surface, and yet she
hoped. I can’t explain her any other way. Can you? Look how she kept me
alive in you all the summer; how she gave you no peace; how month after
month she became more eccentric and unreliable. The sight of us haunted
her—or she couldn’t have described us as she did to her friend. There
are details—it burnt. I read the book afterwards. She is not frozen,
Lucy, she is not withered up all through. She tore us apart twice, but
in the rectory that evening she was given one more chance to make us
happy. We can never make friends with her or thank her. But I do
believe that, far down in her heart, far below all speech and
behaviour, she is glad.”

“It is impossible,” murmured Lucy, and then, remembering the
experiences of her own heart, she said: “No—it is just possible.”

Youth enwrapped them; the song of Phaethon announced passion requited,
love attained. But they were conscious of a love more mysterious than
this. The song died away; they heard the river, bearing down the snows
of winter into the Mediterranean.

CHAPTER I


Except for the Marabar Caves—and they are twenty miles off—the city
of Chandrapore presents nothing extraordinary. Edged rather than
washed by the river Ganges, it trails for a couple of miles along
the bank, scarcely distinguishable from the rubbish it deposits so
freely. There are no bathing-steps on the river front, as the
Ganges happens not to be holy here; indeed there is no river front,
and bazaars shut out the wide and shifting panorama of the stream.
The streets are mean, the temples ineffective, and though a few
fine houses exist they are hidden away in gardens or down alleys
whose filth deters all but the invited guest. Chandrapore was never
large or beautiful, but two hundred years ago it lay on the road
between Upper India, then imperial, and the sea, and the fine
houses date from that period. The zest for decoration stopped in
the eighteenth century, nor was it ever democratic. There is no
painting and scarcely any carving in the bazaars. The very wood
seems made of mud, the inhabitants of mud moving. So abased, so
monotonous is everything that meets the eye, that when the Ganges
comes down it might be expected to wash the excrescence back into
the soil. Houses do fall, people are drowned and left rotting, but
the general outline of the town persists, swelling here, shrinking
there, like some low but indestructible form of life.

Inland, the prospect alters. There is an oval Maidan, and a long
sallow hospital. Houses belonging to Eurasians stand on the high
ground by the railway station. Beyond the railway—which runs
parallel to the river—the land sinks, then rises again rather
steeply. On the second rise is laid out the little civil station,
and viewed hence Chandrapore appears to be a totally different
place. It is a city of gardens. It is no city, but a forest sparsely
scattered with huts. It is a tropical pleasaunce washed by a noble
river. The toddy palms and neem trees and mangoes and pepul that
were hidden behind the bazaars now become visible and in their turn
hide the bazaars. They rise from the gardens where ancient tanks
nourish them, they burst out of stifling purlieus and unconsidered
temples. Seeking, light and air, and endowed with more strength
than man or his works, they soar above the lower deposit to greet
one another with branches and beckoning leaves, and to build a city
for the birds. Especially after the rains do they screen what
passes below, but at all times, even when scorched or leafless,
they glorify the city to the English people who inhabit the rise,
so that new-comers cannot believe it to be as meagre as it is
described, and have to be driven down to acquire disillusionment.
As for the civil station itself, it provokes no emotion. It charms
not, neither does it repel. It is sensibly planned, with a red-brick
club on its brow, and farther back a grocer’s and a cemetery, and
the bungalows are disposed along roads that intersect at right
angles. It has nothing hideous in it, and only the view is
beautiful; it shares nothing with the city except the overarching
sky.

The sky too has its changes, but they are less marked than those
of the vegetation and the river. Clouds map it up at times, but it
is normally a dome of blending tints, and the main tint blue. By
day the blue will pale down into white where it touches the white
of the land, after sunset it has a new circumference—orange,
melting upwards into tenderest purple. But the core of blue
persists, and so it is by night. Then the stars hang like lamps
from the immense vault. The distance between the vault and them is
as nothing to the distance behind them, and that farther distance,
though beyond colour, last freed itself from blue.

The sky settles everything—not only climates and seasons but when
the earth shall be beautiful. By herself she can do little—only
feeble outbursts of flowers. But when the sky chooses, glory can
rain into the Chandrapore bazaars or a benediction pass from
horizon to horizon. The sky can do this because it is so strong
and so enormous. Strength comes from the sun, infused in it daily,
size from the prostrate earth. No mountains infringe on the curve.
League after league the earth lies flat, heaves a little, is flat
again. Only in the south, where a group of fists and fingers are
thrust up through the soil, is the endless expanse interrupted.
These fists and fingers are the Marabar Hills, containing the
extraordinary caves.




  CHAPTER II


Abandoning his bicycle, which fell before a servant could catch
it, the young man sprang up on to the verandah. He was all
animation. “Hamidullah, Hamidullah! am I late?” he cried.

“Do not apologize,” said his host. “You are always late.”

“Kindly answer my question. Am I late? Has Mahmoud Ali eaten all
the food? If so I go elsewhere. Mr. Mahmoud Ali, how are you?”

“Thank you, Dr. Aziz, I am dying.”

“Dying before your dinner? Oh, poor Mahmoud Ali!”

“Hamidullah here is actually dead. He passed away just as you rode
up on your bike.”

“Yes, that is so,” said the other. “Imagine us both as addressing
you from another and a happier world.”

“Does there happen to be such a thing as a hookah in that happier
world of yours?”

“Aziz, don’t chatter. We are having a very sad talk.”

The hookah had been packed too tight, as was usual in his friend’s
house, and bubbled sulkily. He coaxed it. Yielding at last, the
tobacco jetted up into his lungs and nostrils, driving out the
smoke of burning cow dung that had filled them as he rode through
the bazaar. It was delicious. He lay in a trance, sensuous but
healthy, through which the talk of the two others did not seem
particularly sad—they were discussing as to whether or no it is
possible to be friends with an Englishman. Mahmoud Ali argued that
it was not, Hamidullah disagreed, but with so many reservations
that there was no friction between them. Delicious indeed to lie
on the broad verandah with the moon rising in front and the servants
preparing dinner behind, and no trouble happening.

“Well, look at my own experience this morning.”

“I only contend that it is possible in England,” replied Hamidullah,
who had been to that country long ago, before the big rush, and
had received a cordial welcome at Cambridge.

“It is impossible here. Aziz! The red-nosed boy has again insulted
me in Court. I do not blame him. He was told that he ought to
insult me. Until lately he was quite a nice boy, but the others
have got hold of him.”

“Yes, they have no chance here, that is my point. They come out
intending to be gentlemen, and are told it will not do. Look at
Lesley, look at Blakiston, now it is your red-nosed boy, and
Fielding will go next. Why, I remember when Turton came out first.
It was in another part of the Province. You fellows will not
believe me, but I have driven with Turton in his carriage—Turton!
Oh yes, we were once quite intimate. He has shown me his stamp
collection.”

“He would expect you to steal it now. Turton! But red-nosed boy
will be far worse than Turton!”

“I do not think so. They all become exactly the same, not worse,
not better. I give any Englishman two years, be he Turton or
Burton. It is only the difference of a letter. And I give any
Englishwoman six months. All are exactly alike. Do you not agree
with me?”

“I do not,” replied Mahmoud Ali, entering into the bitter fun, and
feeling both pain and amusement at each word that was uttered. “For
my own part I find such profound differences among our rulers.
Red-nose mumbles, Turton talks distinctly, Mrs. Turton takes
bribes, Mrs. Red-nose does not and cannot, because so far there is
no Mrs. Red-nose.”

“Bribes?”

“Did you not know that when they were lent to Central India over
a Canal Scheme, some Rajah or other gave her a sewing machine in
solid gold so that the water should run through his state.”

“And does it?”

“No, that is where Mrs. Turton is so skilful. When we poor blacks
take bribes, we perform what we are bribed to perform, and the law
discovers us in consequence. The English take and do nothing. I
admire them.”

“We all admire them. Aziz, please pass me the hookah.”

“Oh, not yet—hookah is so jolly now.”

“You are a very selfish boy.” He raised his voice suddenly, and
shouted for dinner. Servants shouted back that it was ready. They
meant that they wished it was ready, and were so understood, for
nobody moved. Then Hamidullah continued, but with changed manner
and evident emotion.

“But take my case—the case of young Hugh Bannister. Here is the
son of my dear, my dead friends, the Reverend and Mrs. Bannister,
whose goodness to me in England I shall never forget or describe.
They were father and mother to me, I talked to them as I do now.
In the vacations their Rectory became my home. They entrusted all
their children to me—I often carried little Hugh about—I took him
up to the Funeral of Queen Victoria, and held him in my arms above
the crowd.”

“Queen Victoria was different,” murmured Mahmoud Ali.

“I learn now that this boy is in business as a leather merchant at
Cawnpore. Imagine how I long to see him and to pay his fare that
this house may be his home. But it is useless. The other
Anglo-Indians will have got hold of him long ago. He will probably
think that I want something, and I cannot face that from the son
of my old friends. Oh, what in this country has gone wrong with
everything, Vakil Sahib? I ask you.”

Aziz joined in. “Why talk about the English? Brrrr . . . ! Why be
either friends with the fellows or not friends? Let us shut them
out and be jolly. Queen Victoria and Mrs. Bannister were the only
exceptions, and they’re dead.”

“No, no, I do not admit that, I have met others.”

“So have I,” said Mahmoud Ali, unexpectedly veering. “All ladies
are far from alike.” Their mood was changed, and they recalled
little kindnesses and courtesies. “She said ‘Thank you so much’ in
the most natural way.” “She offered me a lozenge when the dust
irritated my throat.” Hamidullah could remember more important
examples of angelic ministration, but the other, who only knew
Anglo-India, had to ransack his memory for scraps, and it was not
surprising that he should return to “But of course all this is
exceptional. The exception does not prove the rule. The average
woman is like Mrs. Turton, and, Aziz, you know what she is.” Aziz
did not know, but said he did. He too generalized from his
disappointments—it is difficult for members of a subject race to
do otherwise. Granted the exceptions, he agreed that all Englishwomen
are haughty and venal. The gleam passed from the conversation,
whose wintry surface unrolled and expanded interminably.

A servant announced dinner. They ignored him. The elder men had
reached their eternal politics, Aziz drifted into the garden. The
trees smelt sweet—green-blossomed champak—and scraps of Persian
poetry came into his head. Dinner, dinner, dinner . . . but when
he returned to the house for it, Mahmoud Ali had drifted away in
his turn, to speak to his sais. “Come and see my wife a little
then,” said Hamidullah, and they spent twenty minutes behind the
purdah. Hamidullah Begum was a distant aunt of Aziz, and the only
female relative he had in Chandrapore, and she had much to say to
him on this occasion about a family circumcision that had been
celebrated with imperfect pomp. It was difficult to get away,
because until they had had their dinner she would not begin hers,
and consequently prolonged her remarks in case they should suppose
she was impatient. Having censured the circumcision, she bethought
her of kindred topics, and asked Aziz when he was going to be
married.

Respectful but irritated, he answered, “Once is enough.”

“Yes, he has done his duty,” said Hamidullah. “Do not tease him
so. He carries on his family, two boys and their sister.”

“Aunt, they live most comfortably with my wife’s mother, where she
was living when she died. I can see them whenever I like. They are
such very, very small children.”

“And he sends them the whole of his salary and lives like a
low-grade clerk, and tells no one the reason. What more do you
require him to do?”

But this was not Hamidullah Begum’s point, and having courteously
changed the conversation for a few moments she returned and made
it. She said, “What is to become of all our daughters if men refuse
to marry? They will marry beneath them, or——” And she began the
oft-told tale of a lady of Imperial descent who could find no
husband in the narrow circle where her pride permitted her to mate,
and had lived on unwed, her age now thirty, and would die unwed,
for no one would have her now. While the tale was in progress, it
convinced the two men, the tragedy seemed a slur on the whole
community; better polygamy almost, than that a woman should die
without the joys God has intended her to receive. Wedlock,
motherhood, power in the house—for what else is she born, and how
can the man who has denied them to her stand up to face her creator
and his own at the last day? Aziz took his leave saying “Perhaps
. . . but later . . .” —his invariable reply to such an appeal.

“You mustn’t put off what you think right,” said Hamidullah. “That
is why India is in such a plight, because we put off things.” But
seeing that his young relative looked worried, he added a few
soothing words, and thus wiped out any impression that his wife
might have made.

During their absence, Mahmoud Ali had gone off in his carriage
leaving a message that he should be back in five minutes, but they
were on no account to wait. They sat down to meat with a distant
cousin of the house, Mohammed Latif, who lived on Hamidullah’s
bounty and who occupied the position neither of a servant nor of
an equal. He did not speak unless spoken to, and since no one spoke
kept unoffended silence. Now and then he belched, in compliment to
the richness of the food. A gentle, happy and dishonest old man;
all his life he had never done a stroke of work. So long as some
one of his relatives had a house he was sure of a home, and it was
unlikely that so large a family would all go bankrupt. His wife
led a similar existence some hundreds of miles away—he did not
visit her, owing to the expense of the railway ticket. Presently
Aziz chaffed him, also the servants, and then began quoting poetry,
Persian, Urdu, a little Arabic. His memory was good, and for so
young a man he had read largely; the themes he preferred were the
decay of Islam and the brevity of love. They listened delighted,
for they took the public view of poetry, not the private which
obtains in England. It never bored them to hear words, words; they
breathed them with the cool night air, never stopping to analyse;
the name of the poet, Hafiz, Hali, Iqbal, was sufficient guarantee.
India—a hundred Indias—whispered outside beneath the indifferent
moon, but for the time India seemed one and their own, and they
regained their departed greatness by hearing its departure lamented,
they felt young again because reminded that youth must fly. A
servant in scarlet interrupted him; he was the chuprassi of the
Civil Surgeon, and he handed Aziz a note.

“Old Callendar wants to see me at his bungalow,” he said, not
rising. “He might have the politeness to say why.”

“Some case, I daresay.”

“I daresay not, I daresay nothing. He has found out our dinner
hour, that’s all, and chooses to interrupt us every time, in order
to show his power.”

“On the one hand he always does this, on the other it may be a
serious case, and you cannot know,” said Hamidullah, considerately
paving the way towards obedience. “Had you not better clean your
teeth after pan?”

“If my teeth are to be cleaned, I don’t go at all. I am an Indian,
it is an Indian habit to take pan. The Civil Surgeon must put up
with it. Mohammed Latif, my bike, please.”

The poor relation got up. Slightly immersed in the realms of
matter, he laid his hand on the bicycle’s saddle, while a servant
did the actual wheeling. Between them they took it over a tintack.
Aziz held his hands under the ewer, dried them, fitted on his green
felt hat, and then with unexpected energy whizzed out of Hamidullah’s
compound.

“Aziz, Aziz, imprudent boy. . . .” But he was far down the bazaar,
riding furiously. He had neither light nor bell nor had he a brake,
but what use are such adjuncts in a land where the cyclist’s only
hope is to coast from face to face, and just before he collides
with each it vanishes? And the city was fairly empty at this hour.
When his tyre went flat, he leapt off and shouted for a tonga.

He did not at first find one, and he had also to dispose of his
bicycle at a friend’s house. He dallied furthermore to clean his
teeth. But at last he was rattling towards the civil lines, with
a vivid sense of speed. As he entered their arid tidiness,
depression suddenly seized him. The roads, named after victorious
generals and intersecting at right angles, were symbolic of the
net Great Britain had thrown over India. He felt caught in their
meshes. When he turned into Major Callendar’s compound he could
with difficulty restrain himself from getting down from the tonga
and approaching the bungalow on foot, and this not because his soul
was servile but because his feelings—the sensitive edges of
him—feared a gross snub. There had been a “case” last year—an
Indian gentleman had driven up to an official’s house and been
turned back by the servants and been told to approach more
suitably—only one case among thousands of visits to hundreds of
officials, but its fame spread wide. The young man shrank from a
repetition of it. He compromised, and stopped the driver just
outside the flood of light that fell across the verandah.

The Civil Surgeon was out.

“But the sahib has left me some message?”

The servant returned an indifferent “No.” Aziz was in despair. It
was a servant whom he had forgotten to tip, and he could do nothing
now because there were people in the hall. He was convinced that
there was a message, and that the man was withholding it out of
revenge. While they argued, the people came out. Both were ladies.
Aziz lifted his hat. The first, who was in evening dress, glanced
at the Indian and turned instinctively away.

“Mrs. Lesley, it _is_ a tonga,” she cried.

“Ours?” enquired the second, also seeing Aziz, and doing likewise.

“Take the gifts the gods provide, anyhow,” she screeched, and both
jumped in. “O Tonga wallah, club, club. Why doesn’t the fool go?”

“Go, I will pay you to-morrow,” said Aziz to the driver, and as
they went off he called courteously, “You are most welcome, ladies.”
They did not reply, being full of their own affairs.

So it had come, the usual thing—just as Mahmoud Ali said. The
inevitable snub—his bow ignored, his carriage taken. It might have
been worse, for it comforted him somehow that Mesdames Callendar
and Lesley should both be fat and weigh the tonga down behind.
Beautiful women would have pained him. He turned to the servant,
gave him a couple of rupees, and asked again whether there was a
message. The man, now very civil, returned the same answer. Major
Callendar had driven away half an hour before.

“Saying nothing?”

He had as a matter of fact said, “Damn Aziz”—words that the servant
understood, but was too polite to repeat. One can tip too much as
well as too little, indeed the coin that buys the exact truth has
not yet been minted.

“Then I will write him a letter.”

He was offered the use of the house, but was too dignified to enter
it. Paper and ink were brought on to the verandah. He began: “Dear
Sir,—At your express command I have hastened as a subordinate
should——” and then stopped. “Tell him I have called, that is
sufficient,” he said, tearing the protest up. “Here is my card.
Call me a tonga.”

“Huzoor, all are at the club.”

“Then telephone for one down to the railway station.” And since
the man hastened to do this he said, “Enough, enough, I prefer to
walk.” He commandeered a match and lit a cigarette. These
attentions, though purchased, soothed him. They would last as long
as he had rupees, which is something. But to shake the dust of
Anglo-India off his feet! To escape from the net and be back among
manners and gestures that he knew! He began a walk, an unwonted
exercise.

He was an athletic little man, daintily put together, but really
very strong. Nevertheless walking fatigued him, as it fatigues
everyone in India except the new-comer. There is something hostile
in that soil. It either yields, and the foot sinks into a
depression, or else it is unexpectedly rigid and sharp, pressing
stones or crystals against the tread. A series of these little
surprises exhausts; and he was wearing pumps, a poor preparation
for any country. At the edge of the civil station he turned into
a mosque to rest.

He had always liked this mosque. It was gracious, and the
arrangement pleased him. The courtyard—entered through a ruined
gate—contained an ablution tank of fresh clear water, which was
always in motion, being indeed part of a conduit that supplied the
city. The courtyard was paved with broken slabs. The covered part
of the mosque was deeper than is usual; its effect was that of an
English parish church whose side has been taken out. Where he sat,
he looked into three arcades whose darkness was illuminated by a
small hanging lamp and by the moon. The front—in full moonlight—had
the appearance of marble, and the ninety-nine names of God on the
frieze stood out black, as the frieze stood out white against the
sky. The contest between this dualism and the contention of shadows
within pleased Aziz, and he tried to symbolize the whole into some
truth of religion or love. A mosque by winning his approval let
loose his imagination. The temple of another creed, Hindu,
Christian, or Greek, would have bored him and failed to awaken his
sense of beauty. Here was Islam, his own country, more than a
Faith, more than a battle-cry, more, much more . . . Islam, an
attitude towards life both exquisite and durable, where his body
and his thoughts found their home.

His seat was the low wall that bounded the courtyard on the left.
The ground fell away beneath him towards the city, visible as a
blur of trees, and in the stillness he heard many small sounds. On
the right, over in the club, the English community contributed an
amateur orchestra. Elsewhere some Hindus were drumming—he knew they
were Hindus, because the rhythm was uncongenial to him,—and others
were bewailing a corpse—he knew whose, having certified it in the
afternoon. There were owls, the Punjab mail . . . and flowers smelt
deliciously in the station-master’s garden. But the mosque—that
alone signified, and he returned to it from the complex appeal of
the night, and decked it with meanings the builder had never
intended. Some day he too would build a mosque, smaller than this
but in perfect taste, so that all who passed by should experience
the happiness he felt now. And near it, under a low dome, should
be his tomb, with a Persian inscription:

  Alas, without me for thousands of years
  The Rose will blossom and the Spring will bloom,
  But those who have secretly understood my heart—
  They will approach and visit the grave where I lie.

He had seen the quatrain on the tomb of a Deccan king, and regarded
it as profound philosophy—he always held pathos to be profound.
The secret understanding of the heart! He repeated the phrase with
tears in his eyes, and as he did so one of the pillars of the
mosque seemed to quiver. It swayed in the gloom and detached
itself. Belief in ghosts ran in his blood, but he sat firm. Another
pillar moved, a third, and then an Englishwoman stepped out into
the moonlight. Suddenly he was furiously angry and shouted: “Madam!
Madam! Madam!”

“Oh! Oh!” the woman gasped.

“Madam, this is a mosque, you have no right here at all; you should
have taken off your shoes; this is a holy place for Moslems.”

“I have taken them off.”

“You have?”

“I left them at the entrance.”

“Then I ask your pardon.”

Still startled, the woman moved out, keeping the ablution-tank
between them. He called after her, “I am truly sorry for speaking.”

“Yes, I was right, was I not? If I remove my shoes, I am allowed?”

“Of course, but so few ladies take the trouble, especially if
thinking no one is there to see.”

“That makes no difference. God is here.”

“Madam!”

“Please let me go.”

“Oh, can I do you some service now or at any time?”

“No, thank you, really none—good night.”

“May I know your name?”

She was now in the shadow of the gateway, so that he could not see
her face, but she saw his, and she said with a change of voice,
“Mrs. Moore.”

“Mrs.——” Advancing, he found that she was old.

A fabric bigger than the mosque fell to pieces, and he did not know
whether he was glad or sorry. She was older than Hamidullah Begum,
with a red face and white hair. Her voice had deceived him.

“Mrs. Moore, I am afraid I startled you. I shall tell my
community—our friends—about you. That God is here—very good, very
fine indeed. I think you are newly arrived in India.”

“Yes—how did you know?”

“By the way you address me. No, but can I call you a carriage?”

“I have only come from the club. They are doing a play that I have
seen in London, and it was so hot.”

“What was the name of the play?”

_“Cousin Kate.”_

“I think you ought not to walk at night alone, Mrs. Moore. There
are bad characters about and leopards may come across from the
Marabar Hills. Snakes also.”

She exclaimed; she had forgotten the snakes.

“For example, a six-spot beetle,” he continued, “You pick it up,
it bites, you die.”

“But you walk about yourself.”

“Oh, I am used to it.”

“Used to snakes?”

They both laughed. “I’m a doctor,” he said. “Snakes don’t dare bite
me.” They sat down side by side in the entrance, and slipped on
their evening shoes. “Please may I ask you a question now? Why do
you come to India at this time of year, just as the cold weather
is ending?”

“I intended to start earlier, but there was an unavoidable delay.”

“It will soon be so unhealthy for you! And why ever do you come to
Chandrapore?”

“To visit my son. He is the City Magistrate here.”

“Oh no, excuse me, that is quite impossible. Our City Magistrate’s
name is Mr. Heaslop. I know him intimately.”

“He’s my son all the same,” she said, smiling.

“But, Mrs. Moore, how can he be?”

“I was married twice.”

“Yes, now I see, and your first husband died.”

“He did, and so did my second husband.”

“Then we are in the same box,” he said cryptically. “Then is the
City Magistrate the entire of your family now?”

“No, there are the younger ones—Ralph and Stella in England.”

“And the gentleman here, is he Ralph and Stella’s half-brother?”

“Quite right.”

“Mrs. Moore, this is all extremely strange, because like yourself
I have also two sons and a daughter. Is not this the same box with
a vengeance?”

“What are their names? Not also Ronny, Ralph, and Stella, surely?”

The suggestion delighted him. “No, indeed. How funny it sounds!
Their names are quite different and will surprise you. Listen,
please. I am about to tell you my children’s names. The first is
called Ahmed, the second is called Karim, the third—she is the
eldest—Jamila. Three children are enough. Do not you agree with
me?”

“I do.”

They were both silent for a little, thinking of their respective
families. She sighed and rose to go.

“Would you care to see over the Minto Hospital one morning?” he
enquired. “I have nothing else to offer at Chandrapore.”

“Thank you, I have seen it already, or I should have liked to come
with you very much.”

“I suppose the Civil Surgeon took you.”

“Yes, and Mrs. Callendar.”

His voice altered. “Ah! A very charming lady.”

“Possibly, when one knows her better.”

“What? What? You didn’t like her?”

“She was certainly intending to be kind, but I did not find her
exactly charming.”

He burst out with: “She has just taken my tonga without my
permission—do you call that being charming?—and Major Callendar
interrupts me night after night from where I am dining with my
friends and I go at once, breaking up a most pleasant entertainment,
and he is not there and not even a message. Is this charming, pray?
But what does it matter? I can do nothing and he knows it. I am
just a subordinate, my time is of no value, the verandah is good
enough for an Indian, yes, yes, let him stand, and Mrs. Callendar
takes my carriage and cuts me dead . . .”

She listened.

He was excited partly by his wrongs, but much more by the knowledge
that someone sympathized with them. It was this that led him to
repeat, exaggerate, contradict. She had proved her sympathy by
criticizing her fellow-countrywoman to him, but even earlier he
had known. The flame that not even beauty can nourish was springing
up, and though his words were querulous his heart began to glow
secretly. Presently it burst into speech.

“You understand me, you know what others feel. Oh, if others
resembled you!”

Rather surprised, she replied: “I don’t think I understand people
very well. I only know whether I like or dislike them.”

“Then you are an Oriental.”

She accepted his escort back to the club, and said at the gate that
she wished she was a member, so that she could have asked him in.

“Indians are not allowed into the Chandrapore Club even as guests,”
he said simply. He did not expatiate on his wrongs now, being
happy. As he strolled downhill beneath the lovely moon, and again
saw the lovely mosque, he seemed to own the land as much as anyone
owned it. What did it matter if a few flabby Hindus had preceded
him there, and a few chilly English succeeded?




  CHAPTER III


The third act of _Cousin Kate_ was well advanced by the time Mrs.
Moore re-entered the club. Windows were barred, lest the servants
should see their mem-sahibs acting, and the heat was consequently
immense. One electric fan revolved like a wounded bird, another
was out of order. Disinclined to return to the audience, she went
into the billiard room, where she was greeted by “I want to see
the _real_ India,” and her appropriate life came back with a rush.
This was Adela Quested, the queer, cautious girl whom Ronny had
commissioned her to bring from England, and Ronny was her son, also
cautious, whom Miss Quested would probably though not certainly
marry, and she herself was an elderly lady.

“I want to see it too, and I only wish we could. Apparently the
Turtons will arrange something for next Tuesday.”

“It’ll end in an elephant ride, it always does. Look at this
evening. _Cousin Kate!_ Imagine, _Cousin Kate!_ But where have you
been off to? Did you succeed in catching the moon in the Ganges?”

The two ladies had happened, the night before, to see the moon’s
reflection in a distant channel of the stream. The water had drawn
it out, so that it had seemed larger than the real moon, and
brighter, which had pleased them.

“I went to the mosque, but I did not catch the moon.”

“The angle would have altered—she rises later.”

“Later and later,” yawned Mrs. Moore, who was tired after her walk.
“Let me think—we don’t see the other side of the moon out here,
no.”

“Come, India’s not as bad as all that,” said a pleasant voice.
“Other side of the earth, if you like, but we stick to the same
old moon.” Neither of them knew the speaker nor did they ever see
him again. He passed with his friendly word through red-brick
pillars into the darkness.

“We aren’t even seeing the other side of the world; that’s our
complaint,” said Adela. Mrs. Moore agreed; she too was disappointed
at the dullness of their new life. They had made such a romantic
voyage across the Mediterranean and through the sands of Egypt to
the harbour of Bombay, to find only a gridiron of bungalows at the
end of it. But she did not take the disappointment as seriously as
Miss Quested, for the reason that she was forty years older, and
had learnt that Life never gives us what we want at the moment that
we consider appropriate. Adventures do occur, but not punctually.
She said again that she hoped that something interesting would be
arranged for next Tuesday.

“Have a drink,” said another pleasant voice. “Mrs. Moore—Miss
Quested—have a drink, have two drinks.” They knew who it was this
time—the Collector, Mr. Turton, with whom they had dined. Like
themselves, he had found the atmosphere of _Cousin Kate_ too hot.
Ronny, he told them, was stage-managing in place of Major Callendar,
whom some native subordinate or other had let down, and doing it
very well; then he turned to Ronny’s other merits, and in quiet,
decisive tones said much that was flattering. It wasn’t that the
young man was particularly good at the games or the lingo, or that
he had much notion of the Law, but—apparently a large but—Ronny
was dignified.

Mrs. Moore was surprised to learn this, dignity not being a quality
with which any mother credits her son. Miss Quested learnt it with
anxiety, for she had not decided whether she liked dignified men.
She tried indeed to discuss this point with Mr. Turton, but he
silenced her with a good-humoured motion of his hand, and continued
what he had come to say. “The long and the short of it is Heaslop’s
a sahib; he’s the type we want, he’s one of us,” and another
civilian who was leaning over the billiard table said, “Hear,
hear!” The matter was thus placed beyond doubt, and the Collector
passed on, for other duties called him.

Meanwhile the performance ended, and the amateur orchestra played
the National Anthem. Conversation and billiards stopped, faces
stiffened. It was the Anthem of the Army of Occupation. It reminded
every member of the club that he or she was British and in exile.
It produced a little sentiment and a useful accession of will-power.
The meagre tune, the curt series of demands on Jehovah, fused into
a prayer unknown in England, and though they perceived neither
Royalty nor Deity they did perceive something, they were strengthened
to resist another day. Then they poured out, offering one another
drinks.

“Adela, have a drink; mother, a drink.”

They refused—they were weary of drinks—and Miss Quested, who always
said exactly what was in her mind, announced anew that she was
desirous of seeing the real India.

Ronny was in high spirits. The request struck him as comic, and he
called out to another passer-by: “Fielding! how’s one to see the
real India?”

“Try seeing Indians,” the man answered, and vanished.

“Who was that?”

“Our schoolmaster—Government College.”

“As if one could avoid seeing them,” sighed Mrs. Lesley.

“I’ve avoided,” said Miss Quested. “Excepting my own servant, I’ve
scarcely spoken to an Indian since landing.”

“Oh, lucky you.”

“But I want to see them.”

She became the centre of an amused group of ladies. One said,
“Wanting to see Indians! How new that sounds!” Another, “Natives!
why, fancy!” A third, more serious, said, “Let me explain. Natives
don’t respect one any the more after meeting one, you see.”

“That occurs after so many meetings.”

But the lady, entirely stupid and friendly, continued: “What I mean
is, I was a nurse before my marriage, and came across them a great
deal, so I know. I really do know the truth about Indians. A most
unsuitable position for any Englishwoman—I was a nurse in a Native
State. One’s only hope was to hold sternly aloof.”

“Even from one’s patients?”

“Why, the kindest thing one can do to a native is to let him die,”
said Mrs. Callendar.

“How if he went to heaven?” asked Mrs. Moore, with a gentle but
crooked smile.

“He can go where he likes as long as he doesn’t come near me. They
give me the creeps.”

“As a matter of fact I have thought what you were saying about
heaven, and that is why I am against Missionaries,” said the lady
who had been a nurse. “I am all for Chaplains, but all against
Missionaries. Let me explain.”

But before she could do so, the Collector intervened.

“Do you really want to meet the Aryan Brother, Miss Quested? That
can be easily fixed up. I didn’t realize he’d amuse you.” He
thought a moment. “You can practically see any type you like. Take
your choice. I know the Government people and the landowners,
Heaslop here can get hold of the barrister crew, while if you want
to specialize on education, we can come down on Fielding.”

“I’m tired of seeing picturesque figures pass before me as a
frieze,” the girl explained. “It was wonderful when we landed, but
that superficial glamour soon goes.”

Her impressions were of no interest to the Collector; he was only
concerned to give her a good time. Would she like a Bridge Party?
He explained to her what that was—not the game, but a party to
bridge the gulf between East and West; the expression was his own
invention, and amused all who heard it.

“I only want those Indians whom you come across socially—as your
friends.”

“Well, we don’t come across them socially,” he said, laughing.
“They’re full of all the virtues, but we don’t, and it’s now
eleven-thirty, and too late to go into the reasons.”

“Miss Quested, what a name!” remarked Mrs. Turton to her husband
as they drove away. She had not taken to the new young lady,
thinking her ungracious and cranky. She trusted that she hadn’t
been brought out to marry nice little Heaslop, though it looked
like it, Her husband agreed with her in his heart, but he never
spoke against an Englishwoman if he could avoid doing so, and he
only said that Miss Quested naturally made mistakes. He added:
“India does wonders for the judgment, especially during the hot
weather; it has even done wonders for Fielding.” Mrs. Turton closed
her eyes at this name and remarked that Mr. Fielding wasn’t pukka,
and had better marry Miss Quested, for she wasn’t pukka. Then they
reached their bungalow, low and enormous, the oldest and most
uncomfortable bungalow in the civil station, with a sunk soup plate
of a lawn, and they had one drink more, this time of barley water,
and went to bed. Their withdrawal from the club had broken up the
evening, which, like all gatherings, had an official tinge. A
community that bows the knee to a Viceroy and believes that the
divinity that hedges a king can be transplanted, must feel some
reverence for any viceregal substitute. At Chandrapore the Turtons
were little gods; soon they would retire to some suburban villa,
and die exiled from glory.

“It’s decent of the Burra Sahib,” chattered Ronny, much gratified
at the civility that had been shown to his guests. “Do you know
he’s never given a Bridge Party before? Coming on top of the dinner
too! I wish I could have arranged something myself, but when you
know the natives better you’ll realize it’s easier for the Burra
Sahib than for me. They know him—they know he can’t be fooled—I’m
still fresh comparatively. No one can even begin to think of
knowing this country until he has been in it twenty years.—Hullo,
the mater! Here’s your cloak.—Well: for an example of the mistakes
one makes. Soon after I came out I asked one of the Pleaders to
have a smoke with me—only a cigarette, mind. I found afterwards
that he had sent touts all over the bazaar to announce the fact—told
all the litigants, 'Oh, you’d better come to my Vakil Mahmoud
Ali—he’s in with the City Magistrate.’ Ever since then I’ve dropped
on him in Court as hard as I could. It’s taught me a lesson, and
I hope him.”

“Isn’t the lesson that you should invite all the Pleaders to have
a smoke with you?”

“Perhaps, but time’s limited and the flesh weak. I prefer my smoke
at the club amongst my own sort, I’m afraid.”

“Why not ask the Pleaders to the club?” Miss Quested persisted.

“Not allowed.” He was pleasant and patient, and evidently understood
why she did not understand. He implied that he had once been as
she, though not for long. Going to the verandah, he called firmly
to the moon. His sais answered, and without lowering his head, he
ordered his trap to be brought round.

Mrs. Moore, whom the club had stupefied, woke up outside. She
watched the moon, whose radiance stained with primrose the purple
of the surrounding sky. In England the moon had seemed dead and
alien; here she was caught in the shawl of night together with
earth and all the other stars. A sudden sense of unity, of kinship
with the heavenly bodies, passed into the old woman and out, like
water through a tank, leaving a strange freshness behind. She did
not dislike _Cousin Kate_ or the National Anthem, but their note
had died into a new one, just as cocktails and cigars had died into
invisible flowers. When the mosque, long and domeless, gleamed at
the turn of the road, she exclaimed, “Oh, yes—that’s where I got
to—that’s where I’ve been.”

“Been there when?” asked her son.

“Between the acts.”

“But, mother, you can’t do that sort of thing.”

“Can’t mother?” she replied.

“No, really not in this country. It’s not done. There’s the danger
from snakes for one thing. They are apt to lie out in the evening.”

“Ah yes, so the young man there said.”

“This sounds very romantic,” said Miss Quested, who was exceedingly
fond of Mrs. Moore, and was glad she should have had this little
escapade. “You meet a young man in a mosque, and then never let me
know!”

“I was going to tell you, Adela, but something changed the
conversation and I forgot. My memory grows deplorable.”

“Was he nice?”

She paused, then said emphatically: “Very nice.”

“Who was he?” Ronny enquired.

“A doctor. I don’t know his name.”

“A doctor? I know of no young doctor in Chandrapore. How odd! What
was he like?”

“Rather small, with a little moustache and quick eyes. He called
out to me when I was in the dark part of the mosque—about my shoes.
That was how we began talking. He was afraid I had them on, but I
remembered luckily. He told me about his children, and then we
walked back to the club. He knows you well.”

“I wish you had pointed him out to me. I can’t make out who he is.”

“He didn’t come into the club. He said he wasn’t allowed to.”

Thereupon the truth struck him, and he cried “Oh, good gracious!
Not a Mohammedan? Why ever didn’t you tell me you’d been talking
to a native? I was going all wrong.”

“A Mohammedan! How perfectly magnificent!” exclaimed Miss Quested.
“Ronny, isn’t that like your mother? While we talk about seeing
the real India, she goes and sees it, and then forgets she’s seen
it.”

But Ronny was ruffled. From his mother’s description he had thought
the doctor might be young Muggins from over the Ganges, and had
brought out all the comradely emotions. What a mix-up! Why hadn’t
she indicated by the tone of her voice that she was talking about
an Indian? Scratchy and dictatorial, he began to question her. “He
called to you in the mosque, did he? How? Impudently? What was he
doing there himself at that time of night?—No, it’s not their
prayer time.”—This in answer to a suggestion of Miss Quested’s,
who showed the keenest interest. “So he called to you over your
shoes. Then it was impudence. It’s an old trick. I wish you had
had them on.”

“I think it was impudence, but I don’t know about a trick,” said
Mrs. Moore. “His nerves were all on edge—I could tell from his
voice. As soon as I answered he altered.”

“You oughtn’t to have answered.”

“Now look here,” said the logical girl, “wouldn’t you expect a
Mohammedan to answer if you asked him to take off his hat in
church?”

“It’s different, it’s different; you don’t understand.”

“I know I don’t, and I want to. What is the difference, please?”

He wished she wouldn’t interfere. His mother did not signify—she
was just a globe-trotter, a temporary escort, who could retire to
England with what impressions she chose. But Adela, who meditated
spending her life in the country, was a more serious matter; it
would be tiresome if she started crooked over the native question.
Pulling up the mare, he said, “There’s your Ganges.”

Their attention was diverted. Below them a radiance had suddenly
appeared. It belonged neither to water nor moonlight, but stood
like a luminous sheaf upon the fields of darkness. He told them
that it was where the new sand-bank was forming, and that the dark
ravelled bit at the top was the sand, and that the dead bodies
floated down that way from Benares, or would if the crocodiles let
them. “It’s not much of a dead body that gets down to Chandrapore.”

“Crocodiles down in it too, how terrible!” his mother murmured.
The young people glanced at each other and smiled; it amused them
when the old lady got these gentle creeps, and harmony was restored
between them consequently. She continued: “What a terrible river!
what a wonderful river!” and sighed. The radiance was already
altering, whether through shifting of the moon or of the sand; soon
the bright sheaf would be gone, and a circlet, itself to alter, be
burnished upon the streaming void. The women discussed whether they
would wait for the change or not, while the silence broke into
patches of unquietness and the mare shivered. On her account they
did not wait, but drove on to the City Magistrate’s bungalow, where
Miss Quested went to bed, and Mrs. Moore had a short interview with
her son.

He wanted to enquire about the Mohammedan doctor in the mosque. It
was his duty to report suspicious characters and conceivably it
was some disreputable hakim who had prowled up from the bazaar.
When she told him that it was someone connected with the Minto
Hospital, he was relieved, and said that the fellow’s name must be
Aziz, and that he was quite all right, nothing against him at all.

“Aziz! what a charming name!”

“So you and he had a talk. Did you gather he was well disposed?”

Ignorant of the force of this question, she replied, “Yes, quite,
after the first moment.”

“I meant, generally. Did he seem to tolerate us—the brutal
conqueror, the sundried bureaucrat, that sort of thing?”

“Oh, yes, I think so, except the Callendars—he doesn’t care for
the Callendars at all.”

“Oh. So he told you that, did he? The Major will be interested. I
wonder what was the aim of the remark.”

“Ronny, Ronny! you’re never going to pass it on to Major Callendar?”

“Yes, rather. I must, in fact!”

“But, my dear boy——”

“If the Major heard I was disliked by any native subordinate of
mine, I should expect him to pass it on to me.”

“But, my dear boy—a private conversation!”

“Nothing’s private in India. Aziz knew that when he spoke out, so
don’t you worry. He had some motive in what he said. My personal
belief is that the remark wasn’t true.”

“How not true?”

“He abused the Major in order to impress you.”

“I don’t know what you mean, dear.”

“It’s the educated native’s latest dodge. They used to cringe, but
the younger generation believe in a show of manly independence.
They think it will pay better with the itinerant M.P. But whether
the native swaggers or cringes, there’s always something behind
every remark he makes, always something, and if nothing else he’s
trying to increase his izzat—in plain Anglo-Saxon, to score. Of
course there are exceptions.”

“You never used to judge people like this at home.”

“India isn’t home,” he retorted, rather rudely, but in order to
silence her he had been using phrases and arguments that he had
picked up from older officials, and he did not feel quite sure of
himself. When he said “of course there are exceptions” he was
quoting Mr. Turton, while “increasing the izzat” was Major
Callendar’s own. The phrases worked and were in current use at the
club, but she was rather clever at detecting the first from the
second hand, and might press him for definite examples.

She only said, “I can’t deny that what you say sounds very sensible,
but you really must not hand on to Major Callendar anything I have
told you about Doctor Aziz.”

He felt disloyal to his caste, but he promised, adding, “In return
please don’t talk about Aziz to Adela.”

“Not talk about him? Why?”

“There you go again, mother—I really can’t explain every thing. I
don’t want Adela to be worried, that’s the fact; she’ll begin
wondering whether we treat the natives properly, and all that sort
of nonsense.”

“But she came out to be worried—that’s exactly why she’s here. She
discussed it all on the boat. We had a long talk when we went on
shore at Aden. She knows you in play, as she put it, but not in
work, and she felt she must come and look round, before she
decided—and before you decided. She is very, very fair-minded.”

“I know,” he said dejectedly.

The note of anxiety in his voice made her feel that he was still
a little boy, who must have what he liked, so she promised to do
as he wished, and they kissed good night. He had not forbidden her
to think about Aziz, however, and she did this when she retired to
her room. In the light of her son’s comment she reconsidered the
scene at the mosque, to see whose impression was correct. Yes, it
could be worked into quite an unpleasant scene. The doctor had
begun by bullying her, had said Mrs. Callendar was nice, and
then—finding the ground safe—had changed; he had alternately whined
over his grievances and patronized her, had run a dozen ways in a
single sentence, had been unreliable, inquisitive, vain. Yes, it
was all true, but how false as a summary of the man; the essential
life of him had been slain.

Going to hang up her cloak, she found that the tip of the peg was
occupied by a small wasp. She had known this wasp or his relatives
by day; they were not as English wasps, but had long yellow legs
which hung down behind when they flew. Perhaps he mistook the peg
for a branch—no Indian animal has any sense of an interior. Bats,
rats, birds, insects will as soon nest inside a house as out; it
is to them a normal growth of the eternal jungle, which alternately
produces houses trees, houses trees. There he clung, asleep, while
jackals in the plain bayed their desires and mingled with the
percussion of drums.

“Pretty dear,” said Mrs. Moore to the wasp. He did not wake, but
her voice floated out, to swell the night’s uneasiness.




  CHAPTER IV


The Collector kept his word. Next day he issued invitation cards
to numerous Indian gentlemen in the neighbourhood, stating that he
would be at home in the garden of the club between the hours of
five and seven on the following Tuesday, also that Mrs. Turton
would be glad to receive any ladies of their families who were out
of purdah. His action caused much excitement and was discussed in
several worlds.

“It is owing to orders from the L.G.,” was Mahmoud Ali’s explanation.
“Turton would never do this unless compelled. Those high officials
are different—they sympathize, the Viceroy sympathizes, they would
have us treated properly. But they come too seldom and live too
far away. Meanwhile——”

“It is easy to sympathize at a distance,” said an old gentleman
with a beard. “I value more the kind word that is spoken close to
my ear. Mr. Turton has spoken it, from whatever cause. He speaks,
we hear. I do not see why we need discuss it further.” Quotations
followed from the Koran.

“We have not all your sweet nature, Nawab Bahadur, nor your
learning.”

“The Lieutenant-Governor may be my very good friend, but I give
him no trouble.—How do you do, Nawab Bahadur?—Quite well, thank
you, Sir Gilbert; how are you?—And all is over. But I can be a
thorn in Mr. Turton’s flesh, and if he asks me I accept the
invitation. I shall come in from Dilkusha specially, though I have
to postpone other business.”

“You will make yourself chip,” suddenly said a little black man.

There was a stir of disapproval. Who was this ill-bred upstart,
that he should criticize the leading Mohammedan landowner of the
district? Mahmoud Ali, though sharing his opinion, felt bound to
oppose it. “Mr. Ram Chand!” he said, swaying forward stiffly with
his hands on his hips.

“Mr. Mahmoud Ali!”

“Mr. Ram Chand, the Nawab Bahadur can decide what is cheap without
our valuation, I think.”

“I do not expect I shall make myself cheap,” said the Nawab Bahadur
to Mr. Ram Chand, speaking very pleasantly, for he was aware that
the man had been impolite and he desired to shield him from the
consequences. It had passed through his mind to reply, “I expect
I shall make myself cheap,” but he rejected this as the less
courteous alternative. “I do not see why we should make ourselves
cheap. I do not see why we should. The invitation is worded very
graciously.” Feeling that he could not further decrease the social
gulf between himself and his auditors, he sent his elegant grandson,
who was in attendance on him, to fetch his car. When it came, he
repeated all that he had said before, though at greater length,
ending up with “Till Tuesday, then, gentlemen all, when I hope we
may meet in the flower gardens of the club.”

This opinion carried great weight. The Nawab Bahadur was a big
proprietor and a philanthropist, a man of benevolence and decision.
His character among all the communities in the province stood high.
He was a straightforward enemy and a staunch friend, and his
hospitality was proverbial. “Give, do not lend; after death who
will thank you?” was his favourite remark. He held it a disgrace
to die rich. When such a man was prepared to motor twenty-five
miles to shake the Collector’s hand, the entertainment took another
aspect. For he was not like some eminent men, who give out that
they will come, and then fail at the last moment, leaving the small
fry floundering. If he said he would come, he would come, he would
never deceive his supporters. The gentlemen whom he had lectured
now urged one another to attend the party, although convinced at
heart that his advice was unsound.

He had spoken in the little room near the Courts where the pleaders
waited for clients; clients, waiting for pleaders, sat in the dust
outside. These had not received a card from Mr. Turton. And there
were circles even beyond these—people who wore nothing but a
loincloth, people who wore not even that, and spent their lives in
knocking two sticks together before a scarlet doll—humanity grading
and drifting beyond the educated vision, until no earthly invitation
can embrace it.

All invitations must proceed from heaven perhaps; perhaps it is
futile for men to initiate their own unity, they do but widen the
gulfs between them by the attempt. So at all events thought old
Mr. Graysford and young Mr. Sorley, the devoted missionaries who
lived out beyond the slaughterhouses, always travelled third on
the railways, and never came up to the club. In our Father’s house
are many mansions, they taught, and there alone will the incompatible
multitudes of mankind be welcomed and soothed. Not one shall be
turned away by the servants on that verandah, be he black or white,
not one shall be kept standing who approaches with a loving heart.
And why should the divine hospitality cease here? Consider, with
all reverence, the monkeys. May there not be a mansion for the
monkeys also? Old Mr. Graysford said No, but young Mr. Sorley, who
was advanced, said Yes; he saw no reason why monkeys should not
have their collateral share of bliss, and he had sympathetic
discussions about them with his Hindu friends. And the jackals?
Jackals were indeed less to Mr. Sorley’s mind, but he admitted that
the mercy of God, being infinite, may well embrace all mammals.
And the wasps? He became uneasy during the descent to wasps, and
was apt to change the conversation. And oranges, cactuses, crystals
and mud? and the bacteria inside Mr. Sorley? No, no, this is going
too far. We must exclude someone from our gathering, or we shall
be left with nothing.




  CHAPTER V


The Bridge Party was not a success—at least it was not what Mrs.
Moore and Miss Quested were accustomed to consider a successful
party. They arrived early, since it was given in their honour, but
most of the Indian guests had arrived even earlier, and stood
massed at the farther side of the tennis lawns, doing nothing.

“It is only just five,” said Mrs. Turton. “My husband will be up
from his office in a moment and start the thing. I have no idea
what we have to do. It’s the first time we’ve ever given a party
like this at the club. Mr. Heaslop, when I’m dead and gone will
you give parties like this? It’s enough to make the old type of
Burra Sahib turn in his grave.”

Ronny laughed deferentially. “You wanted something not picturesque
and we’ve provided it,” he remarked to Miss Quested. “What do you
think of the Aryan Brother in a topi and spats?”

Neither she nor his mother answered. They were gazing rather sadly
over the tennis lawn. No, it was not picturesque; the East,
abandoning its secular magnificence, was descending into a valley
whose farther side no man can see.

“The great point to remember is that no one who’s here matters;
those who matter don’t come. Isn’t that so, Mrs. Turton?”

“Absolutely true,” said the great lady, leaning back. She was
“saving herself up,” as she called it—not for anything that would
happen that afternoon or even that week, but for some vague future
occasion when a high official might come along and tax her social
strength. Most of her public appearances were marked by this air
of reserve.

Assured of her approbation, Ronny continued: “The educated Indians
will be no good to us if there’s a row, it’s simply not worth while
conciliating them, that’s why they don’t matter. Most of the people
you see are seditious at heart, and the rest ’ld run squealing.
The cultivator—he’s another story. The Pathan—he’s a man if you
like. But these people—don’t imagine they’re India.” He pointed to
the dusky line beyond the court, and here and there it flashed a
pince-nez or shuffled a shoe, as if aware that he was despising
it. European costume had lighted like a leprosy. Few had yielded
entirely, but none were untouched. There was a silence when he had
finished speaking, on both sides of the court; at least, more
ladies joined the English group, but their words seemed to die as
soon as uttered. Some kites hovered overhead, impartial, over the
kites passed the mass of a vulture, and with an impartiality
exceeding all, the sky, not deeply coloured but translucent, poured
light from its whole circumference. It seemed unlikely that the
series stopped here. Beyond the sky must not there be something
that overarches all the skies, more impartial even than they?
Beyond which again . . .

They spoke of _Cousin Kate._

They had tried to reproduce their own attitude to life upon the
stage, and to dress up as the middle-class English people they
actually were. Next year they would do _Quality Street_ or _The
Yeomen of the Guard._ Save for this annual incursion, they left
literature alone. The men had no time for it, the women did nothing
that they could not share with the men. Their ignorance of the Arts
was notable, and they lost no opportunity of proclaiming it to one
another; it was the Public School attitude, flourishing more
vigorously than it can yet hope to do in England. If Indians were
shop, the Arts were bad form, and Ronny had repressed his mother
when she enquired after his viola; a viola was almost a demerit,
and certainly not the sort of instrument one mentioned in public.
She noticed now how tolerant and conventional his judgments had
become; when they had seen _Cousin Kate_ in London together in the
past, he had scorned it; now he pretended that it was a good play,
in order to hurt nobody’s feelings. An “unkind notice” had appeared
in the local paper, “the sort of thing no white man could have
written,” as Mrs. Lesley said. The play was praised, to be sure,
and so were the stage management and the performance as a whole,
but the notice contained the following sentence: “Miss Derek,
though she charmingly looked her part, lacked the necessary
experience, and occasionally forgot her words.” This tiny breath
of genuine criticism had given deep offence, not indeed to Miss
Derek, who was as hard as nails, but to her friends. Miss Derek
did not belong to Chandrapore. She was stopping for a fortnight
with the McBrydes, the police people, and she had been so good as
to fill up a gap in the cast at the last moment. A nice impression
of local hospitality she would carry away with her.

“To work, Mary, to work,” cried the Collector, touching his wife
on the shoulder with a switch.

Mrs. Turton got up awkwardly. “What do you want me to do? Oh, those
purdah women! I never thought any would come. Oh dear!”

A little group of Indian ladies had been gathering in a third
quarter of the grounds, near a rustic summer-house in which the
more timid of them had already taken refuge. The rest stood with
their backs to the company and their faces pressed into a bank of
shrubs. At a little distance stood their male relatives, watching
the venture. The sight was significant: an island bared by the
turning tide, and bound to grow.

“I consider they ought to come over to me.”

“Come along, Mary, get it over.”

“I refuse to shake hands with any of the men, unless it has to be
the Nawab Bahadur.”

“Whom have we so far?” He glanced along the line. “H’m! h’m! much
as one expected. We know why he’s here, I think—over that contract,
and he wants to get the right side of me for Mohurram, and he’s
the astrologer who wants to dodge the municipal building regulations,
and he’s that Parsi, and he’s—Hullo! there he goes—smash into our
hollyhocks. Pulled the left rein when he meant the right. All as
usual.”

“They ought never to have been allowed to drive in; it’s so bad
for them,” said Mrs. Turton, who had at last begun her progress to
the summer-house, accompanied by Mrs. Moore, Miss Quested, and a
terrier. “Why they come at all I don’t know. They hate it as much
as we do. Talk to Mrs. McBryde. Her husband made her give purdah
parties until she struck.”

“This isn’t a purdah party,” corrected Miss Quested.

“Oh, really,” was the haughty rejoinder.

“Do kindly tell us who these ladies are,” asked Mrs. Moore.

“You’re superior to them, anyway. Don’t forget that. You’re superior
to everyone in India except one or two of the Ranis, and they’re
on an equality.”

Advancing, she shook hands with the group and said a few words of
welcome in Urdu. She had learnt the lingo, but only to speak to
her servants, so she knew none of the politer forms and of the
verbs only the imperative mood. As soon as her speech was over,
she enquired of her companions, “Is that what you wanted?”

“Please tell these ladies that I wish we could speak their language,
but we have only just come to their country.”

“Perhaps we speak yours a little,” one of the ladies said.

“Why, fancy, she understands!” said Mrs. Turton.

“Eastbourne, Piccadilly, High Park Corner,” said another of the
ladies.

“Oh yes, they’re English-speaking.”

“But now we can talk: how delightful!” cried Adela, her face
lighting up.

“She knows Paris also,” called one of the onlookers.

“They pass Paris on the way, no doubt,” said Mrs. Turton, as if
she was describing the movements of migratory birds. Her manner
had grown more distant since she had discovered that some of the
group was Westernized, and might apply her own standards to her.

“The shorter lady, she is my wife, she is Mrs. Bhattacharya,” the
onlooker explained. “The taller lady, she is my sister, she is Mrs.
Das.”

The shorter and the taller ladies both adjusted their saris, and
smiled. There was a curious uncertainty about their gestures, as
if they sought for a new formula which neither East nor West could
provide. When Mrs. Bhattacharya’s husband spoke, she turned away
from him, but she did not mind seeing the other men. Indeed all
the ladies were uncertain, cowering, recovering, giggling, making
tiny gestures of atonement or despair at all that was said, and
alternately fondling the terrier or shrinking from him. Miss
Quested now had her desired opportunity; friendly Indians were
before her, and she tried to make them talk, but she failed, she
strove in vain against the echoing walls of their civility. Whatever
she said produced a murmur of deprecation, varying into a murmur
of concern when she dropped her pocket-handkerchief. She tried
doing nothing, to see what that produced, and they too did nothing.
Mrs. Moore was equally unsuccessful. Mrs. Turton waited for them
with a detached expression; she had known what nonsense it all was
from the first.

When they took their leave, Mrs. Moore had an impulse, and said to
Mrs. Bhattacharya, whose face she liked, “I wonder whether you
would allow us to call on you some day.”

“When?” she replied, inclining charmingly.

“Whenever is convenient.”

“All days are convenient.”

“Thursday . . .”

“Most certainly.”

“We shall enjoy it greatly, it would be a real pleasure. What about
the time?”

“All hours.”

“Tell us which you would prefer. We’re quite strangers to your
country; we don’t know when you have visitors,” said Miss Quested.

Mrs. Bhattacharya seemed not to know either. Her gesture implied
that she had known, since Thursdays began, that English ladies
would come to see her on one of them, and so always stayed in.
Everything pleased her, nothing surprised. She added, “We leave
for Calcutta to-day.”

“Oh, do you?” said Adela, not at first seeing the implication. Then
she cried, “Oh, but if you do we shall find you gone.”

Mrs. Bhattacharya did not dispute it. But her husband called from
the distance, “Yes, yes, you come to us Thursday.”

“But you’ll be in Calcutta.”

“No, no, we shall not.” He said something swiftly to his wife in
Bengali. “We expect you Thursday.”

“Thursday . . .” the woman echoed.

“You can’t have done such a dreadful thing as to put off going for
our sake?” exclaimed Mrs. Moore.

“No, of course not, we are not such people.” He was laughing.

“I believe that you have. Oh, please—it distresses me beyond
words.”

Everyone was laughing now, but with no suggestion that they had
blundered. A shapeless discussion occurred, during which Mrs.
Turton retired, smiling to herself. The upshot was that they were
to come Thursday, but early in the morning, so as to wreck the
Bhattacharya plans as little as possible, and Mr. Bhattacharya
would send his carriage to fetch them, with servants to point out
the way. Did he know where they lived? Yes, of course he knew, he
knew everything; and he laughed again. They left among a flutter
of compliments and smiles, and three ladies, who had hitherto taken
no part in the reception, suddenly shot out of the summer-house
like exquisitely coloured swallows, and salaamed them.

Meanwhile the Collector had been going his rounds. He made pleasant
remarks and a few jokes, which were applauded lustily, but he knew
something to the discredit of nearly every one of his guests, and
was consequently perfunctory. When they had not cheated, it was
bhang, women, or worse, and even the desirables wanted to get
something out of him. He believed that a “Bridge Party” did good
rather than harm, or he would not have given one, but he was under
no illusions, and at the proper moment he retired to the English
side of the lawn. The impressions he left behind him were various.
Many of the guests, especially the humbler and less anglicized,
were genuinely grateful. To be addressed by so high an official
was a permanent asset. They did not mind how long they stood, or
how little happened, and when seven o’clock struck, they had to be
turned out. Others were grateful with more intelligence. The Nawab
Bahadur, indifferent for himself and for the distinction with which
he was greeted, was moved by the mere kindness that must have
prompted the invitation. He knew the difficulties. Hamidullah also
thought that the Collector had played up well. But others, such as
Mahmoud Ali, were cynical; they were firmly convinced that Turton
had been made to give the party by his official superiors and was
all the time consumed with impotent rage, and they infected some
who were inclined to a healthier view. Yet even Mahmoud Ali was
glad he had come. Shrines are fascinating, especially when rarely
opened, and it amused him to note the ritual of the English club,
and to caricature it afterwards to his friends.

After Mr. Turton, the official who did his duty best was Mr.
Fielding, the Principal of the little Government College. He knew
little of the district and less against the inhabitants, so he was
in a less cynical state of mind. Athletic and cheerful, he romped
about, making numerous mistakes which the parents of his pupils
tried to cover up, for he was popular among them. When the moment
for refreshments came, he did not move back to the English side,
but burnt his mouth with gram. He talked to anyone and he ate
anything. Amid much that was alien, he learnt that the two new
ladies from England had been a great success, and that their
politeness in wishing to be Mrs. Bhattacharya’s guests had pleased
not only her but all Indians who heard of it. It pleased Mr.
Fielding also. He scarcely knew the two new ladies, still he
decided to tell them what pleasure they had given by their
friendliness.

He found the younger of them alone. She was looking through a nick
in the cactus hedge at the distant Marabar Hills, which had crept
near, as was their custom at sunset; if the sunset had lasted long
enough, they would have reached the town, but it was swift, being
tropical. He gave her his information, and she was so much pleased
and thanked him so heartily that he asked her and the other lady
to tea.

“I’ld like to come very much indeed, and so would Mrs. Moore, I
know.”

“I’m rather a hermit, you know.”

“Much the best thing to be in this place.”

“Owing to my work and so on, I don’t get up much to the club.”

“I know, I know, and we never get down from it. I envy you being
with Indians.”

“Do you care to meet one or two?”

“Very, very much indeed; it’s what I long for. This party to-day
makes me so angry and miserable. I think my countrymen out here
must be mad. Fancy inviting guests and not treating them properly!
You and Mr. Turton and perhaps Mr. McBryde are the only people who
showed any common politeness. The rest make me perfectly ashamed,
and it’s got worse and worse.”

It had. The Englishmen had intended to play up better, but had been
prevented from doing so by their women folk, whom they had to
attend, provide with tea, advise about dogs, etc. When tennis
began, the barrier grew impenetrable. It had been hoped to have
some sets between East and West, but this was forgotten, and the
courts were monopolized by the usual club couples. Fielding resented
it too, but did not say so to the girl, for he found something
theoretical in her outburst. Did she care about Indian music? he
enquired; there was an old professor down at the College, who sang.

“Oh, just what we wanted to hear. And do you know Doctor Aziz?”

“I know all about him. I don’t know him. Would you like him asked
too?”

“Mrs. Moore says he is so nice.”

“Very well, Miss Quested. Will Thursday suit you?”

“Indeed it will, and that morning we go to this Indian lady’s. All
the nice things are coming Thursday.”

“I won’t ask the City Magistrate to bring you. I know he’ll be busy
at that time.”

“Yes, Ronny is always hard-worked,” she replied, contemplating the
hills. How lovely they suddenly were! But she couldn’t touch them.
In front, like a shutter, fell a vision of her married life. She
and Ronny would look into the club like this every evening, then
drive home to dress; they would see the Lesleys and the Callendars
and the Turtons and the Burtons, and invite them and be invited by
them, while the true India slid by unnoticed. Colour would
remain—the pageant of birds in the early morning, brown bodies,
white turbans, idols whose flesh was scarlet or blue—and movement
would remain as long as there were crowds in the bazaar and bathers
in the tanks. Perched up on the seat of a dogcart, she would see
them. But the force that lies behind colour and movement would
escape her even more effectually than it did now. She would see
India always as a frieze, never as a spirit, and she assumed that
it was a spirit of which Mrs. Moore had had a glimpse.

And sure enough they did drive away from the club in a few minutes,
and they did dress, and to dinner came Miss Derek and the McBrydes,
and the menu was: Julienne soup full of bullety bottled peas,
pseudo-cottage bread, fish full of branching bones, pretending to
be plaice, more bottled peas with the cutlets, trifle, sardines on
toast: the menu of Anglo-India. A dish might be added or subtracted
as one rose or fell in the official scale, the peas might rattle
less or more, the sardines and the vermouth be imported by a
different firm, but the tradition remained; the food of exiles,
cooked by servants who did not understand it. Adela thought of the
young men and women who had come out before her, P. & O. full after
P. & O. full, and had been set down to the same food and the same
ideas, and been snubbed in the same good-humoured way until they
kept to the accredited themes and began to snub others. “I should
never get like that,” she thought, for she was young herself; all
the same she knew that she had come up against something that was
both insidious and tough, and against which she needed allies. She
must gather around her at Chandrapore a few people who felt as she
did, and she was glad to have met Mr. Fielding and the Indian lady
with the unpronounceable name. Here at all events was a nucleus;
she should know much better where she stood in the course of the
next two days.

Miss Derek—she companioned a Maharani in a remote Native State.
She was genial and gay and made them all laugh about her leave,
which she had taken because she felt she deserved it, not because
the Maharani said she might go. Now she wanted to take the
Maharajah’s motor-car as well; it had gone to a Chiefs’ Conference
at Delhi, and she had a great scheme for burgling it at the junction
as it came back in the train. She was also very funny about the
Bridge Party—indeed she regarded the entire peninsula as a comic
opera. “If one couldn’t see the laughable side of these people one
’ld be done for,” said Miss Derek. Mrs. McBryde—it was she who had
been the nurse—ceased not to exclaim, “Oh, Nancy, how topping! Oh,
Nancy, how killing! I wish I could look at things like that.” Mr.
McBryde did not speak much; he seemed nice.

When the guests had gone, and Adela gone to bed, there was another
interview between mother and son. He wanted her advice and
support—while resenting interference. “Does Adela talk to you
much?” he began. “I’m so driven with work, I don’t see her as much
as I hoped, but I hope she finds things comfortable.”

“Adela and I talk mostly about India. Dear, since you mention it,
you’re quite right—you ought to be more alone with her than you
are.”

“Yes, perhaps, but then people’ld gossip.”

“Well, they must gossip sometime! Let them gossip.”

“People are so odd out here, and it’s not like home—one’s always
facing the footlights, as the Burra Sahib said. Take a silly little
example: when Adela went out to the boundary of the club compound,
and Fielding followed her. I saw Mrs. Callendar notice it. They
notice everything, until they’re perfectly sure you’re their sort.”

“I don’t think Adela ’ll ever be quite their sort—she’s much too
individual.”

“I know, that’s so remarkable about her,” he said thoughtfully.
Mrs. Moore thought him rather absurd. Accustomed to the privacy of
London, she could not realize that India, seemingly so mysterious,
contains none, and that consequently the conventions have greater
force. “I suppose nothing’s on her mind,” he continued.

“Ask her, ask her yourself, my dear boy.”

“Probably she’s heard tales of the heat, but of course I should
pack her off to the Hills every April—I’m not one to keep a wife
grilling in the Plains.”

“Oh, it wouldn’t be the weather.”

“There’s nothing in India but the weather, my dear mother; it’s
the Alpha and Omega of the whole affair.”

“Yes, as Mr. McBryde was saying, but it’s much more the Anglo-Indians
themselves who are likely to get on Adela’s nerves. She doesn’t
think they behave pleasantly to Indians, you see.”

“What did I tell you?” he exclaimed, losing his gentle manner. “I
knew it last week. Oh, how like a woman to worry over a side-issue!”

She forgot about Adela in her surprise. “A side-issue, a side-issue?”
she repeated. “How can it be that?”

“We’re not out here for the purpose of behaving pleasantly!”

“What do you mean?”

“What I say. We’re out here to do justice and keep the peace.
Them’s my sentiments. India isn’t a drawing-room.”

“Your sentiments are those of a god,” she said quietly, but it was
his manner rather than his sentiments that annoyed her.

Trying to recover his temper, he said, “India likes gods.”

“And Englishmen like posing as gods.”

“There’s no point in all this. Here we are, and we’re going to
stop, and the country’s got to put up with us, gods or no gods.
Oh, look here,” he broke out, rather pathetically, “what do you
and Adela want me to do? Go against my class, against all the
people I respect and admire out here? Lose such power as I have
for doing good in this country because my behaviour isn’t pleasant?
You neither of you understand what work is, or you ’ld never talk
such eyewash. I hate talking like this, but one must occasionally.
It’s morbidly sensitive to go on as Adela and you do. I noticed
you both at the club to-day—after the Burra Sahib had been at all
that trouble to amuse you. I am out here to work, mind, to hold
this wretched country by force. I’m not a missionary or a Labour
Member or a vague sentimental sympathetic literary man. I’m just
a servant of the Government; it’s the profession you wanted me to
choose myself, and that’s that. We’re not pleasant in India, and
we don’t intend to be pleasant. We’ve something more important to
do.”

He spoke sincerely. Every day he worked hard in the court trying
to decide which of two untrue accounts was the less untrue, trying
to dispense justice fearlessly, to protect the weak against the
less weak, the incoherent against the plausible, surrounded by lies
and flattery. That morning he had convicted a railway clerk of
overcharging pilgrims for their tickets, and a Pathan of attempted
rape. He expected no gratitude, no recognition for this, and both
clerk and Pathan might appeal, bribe their witnesses more
effectually in the interval, and get their sentences reversed. It
was his duty. But he did expect sympathy from his own people, and
except from new-comers he obtained it. He did think he ought not
to be worried about “Bridge Parties” when the day’s work was over
and he wanted to play tennis with his equals or rest his legs upon
a long chair.

He spoke sincerely, but she could have wished with less gusto. How
Ronny revelled in the drawbacks of his situation! How he did rub
it in that he was not in India to behave pleasantly, and derived
positive satisfaction therefrom! He reminded her of his
public-schooldays. The traces of young-man humanitarianism had
sloughed off, and he talked like an intelligent and embittered boy.
His words without his voice might have impressed her, but when she
heard the self-satisfied lilt of them, when she saw the mouth
moving so complacently and competently beneath the little red nose,
she felt, quite illogically, that this was not the last word on
India. One touch of regret—not the canny substitute but the true
regret from the heart—would have made him a different man, and the
British Empire a different institution.

“I’m going to argue, and indeed dictate,” she said, clinking her
rings. “The English are out here to be pleasant.”

“How do you make that out, mother?” he asked, speaking gently
again, for he was ashamed of his irritability.

“Because India is part of the earth. And God has put us on the
earth in order to be pleasant to each other. God . . . is . . .
love.” She hesitated, seeing how much he disliked the argument,
but something made her go on. “God has put us on earth to love our
neighbours and to show it, and He is omnipresent, even in India,
to see how we are succeeding.”

He looked gloomy, and a little anxious. He knew this religious
strain in her, and that it was a symptom of bad health; there had
been much of it when his stepfather died. He thought, “She is
certainly ageing, and I ought not to be vexed with anything she
says.”

“The desire to behave pleasantly satisfies God. . . The sincere if
impotent desire wins His blessing. I think every one fails, but
there are so many kinds of failure. Good will and more good will
and more good will. Though I speak with the tongues of . . .”

He waited until she had done, and then said gently, “I quite see
that. I suppose I ought to get off to my files now, and you’ll be
going to bed.”

“I suppose so, I suppose so.” They did not part for a few minutes,
but the conversation had become unreal since Christianity had
entered it. Ronny approved of religion as long as it endorsed the
National Anthem, but he objected when it attempted to influence
his life. Then he would say in respectful yet decided tones, “I
don’t think it does to talk about these things, every fellow has
to work out his own religion,” and any fellow who heard him
muttered, “Hear!”

Mrs. Moore felt that she had made a mistake in mentioning God, but
she found him increasingly difficult to avoid as she grew older,
and he had been constantly in her thoughts since she entered India,
though oddly enough he satisfied her less. She must needs pronounce
his name frequently, as the greatest she knew, yet she had never
found it less efficacious. Outside the arch there seemed always an
arch, beyond the remotest echo a silence. And she regretted
afterwards that she had not kept to the real serious subject that
had caused her to visit India—namely the relationship between Ronny
and Adela. Would they, or would they not, succeed in becoming
engaged to be married?




  CHAPTER VI


Aziz had not gone to the Bridge Party. Immediately after his
meeting with Mrs. Moore he was diverted to other matters. Several
surgical cases came in, and kept him busy. He ceased to be either
outcaste or poet, and became the medical student, very gay, and
full of details of operations which he poured into the shrinking
ears of his friends. His profession fascinated him at times, but
he required it to be exciting, and it was his hand, not his mind,
that was scientific. The knife he loved and used skilfully, and he
also liked pumping in the latest serums. But the boredom of regime
and hygiene repelled him, and after inoculating a man for enteric,
he would go away and drink unfiltered water himself. “What can you
expect from the fellow?” said dour Major Callendar. “No grits, no
guts.” But in his heart he knew that if Aziz and not he had operated
last year on Mrs. Graysford’s appendix, the old lady would probably
have lived. And this did not dispose him any better towards his
subordinate.

There was a row the morning after the mosque—they were always
having rows. The Major, who had been up half the night, wanted damn
well to know why Aziz had not come promptly when summoned.

“Sir, excuse me, I did. I mounted my bike, and it bust in front of
the Cow Hospital. So I had to find a tonga.”

“Bust in front of the Cow Hospital, did it? And how did you come
to be there?”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Oh Lord, oh Lord! When I live here”—he kicked the gravel—“and you
live there—not ten minutes from me—and the Cow Hospital is right
ever so far away the other side of you—_there_—then how did you
come to be passing the Cow Hospital on the way to me? Now do some
work for a change.”

He strode away in a temper, without waiting for the excuse, which
as far as it went was a sound one: the Cow Hospital was in a
straight line between Hamidullah’s house and his own, so Aziz had
naturally passed it. He never realized that the educated Indians
visited one another constantly, and were weaving, however painfully,
a new social fabric. Caste “or something of the sort” would prevent
them. He only knew that no one ever told him the truth, although
he had been in the country for twenty years.

Aziz watched him go with amusement. When his spirits were up he
felt that the English are a comic institution, and he enjoyed being
misunderstood by them. But it was an amusement of the emotions and
nerves, which an accident or the passage of time might destroy; it
was apart from the fundamental gaiety that he reached when he was
with those whom he trusted. A disobliging simile involving Mrs.
Callendar occurred to his fancy. “I must tell that to Mahmoud Ali,
it’ll make him laugh,” he thought. Then he got to work. He was
competent and indispensable, and he knew it. The simile passed from
his mind while he exercised his professional skill.

During these pleasant and busy days, he heard vaguely that the
Collector was giving a party, and that the Nawab Bahadur said every
one ought to go to it. His fellow-assistant, Doctor Panna Lal, was
in ecstasies at the prospect, and was urgent that they should
attend it together in his new tum-tum. The arrangement suited them
both. Aziz was spared the indignity of a bicycle or the expense of
hiring, while Dr. Panna Lal, who was timid and elderly, secured
someone who could manage his horse. He could manage it himself,
but only just, and he was afraid of the motors and of the unknown
turn into the club grounds. “Disaster may come,” he said politely,
“but we shall at all events get there safe, even if we do not get
back.” And with more logic: “It will, I think, create a good
impression should two doctors arrive at the same time.”

But when the time came, Aziz was seized with a revulsion, and
determined not to go. For one thing his spell of work, lately
concluded, left him independent and healthy. For another, the day
chanced to fall on the anniversary of his wife’s death. She had
died soon after he had fallen in love with her; he had not loved
her at first. Touched by Western feeling, he disliked union with
a woman whom he had never seen; moreover, when he did see her, she
disappointed him, and he begat his first child in mere animality.
The change began after its birth. He was won by her love for him,
by a loyalty that implied something more than submission, and by
her efforts to educate herself against that lifting of the purdah
that would come in the next generation if not in theirs. She was
intelligent, yet had old-fashioned grace. Gradually he lost the
feeling that his relatives had chosen wrongly for him. Sensuous
enjoyment—well, even if he had had it, it would have dulled in a
year, and he had gained something instead, which seemed to increase
the longer they lived together. She became the mother of a son . . .
and in giving him a second son she died. Then he realized what
he had lost, and that no woman could ever take her place; a friend
would come nearer to her than another woman. She had gone, there
was no one like her, and what is that uniqueness but love? He
amused himself, he forgot her at times: but at other times he felt
that she had sent all the beauty and joy of the world into Paradise,
and he meditated suicide. Would he meet her beyond the tomb? Is
there such a meeting-place? Though orthodox, he did not know. God’s
unity was indubitable and indubitably announced, but on all other
points he wavered like the average Christian; his belief in the
life to come would pale to a hope, vanish, reappear, all in a
single sentence or a dozen heart-beats, so that the corpuscles of
his blood rather than he seemed to decide which opinion he should
hold, and for how long. It was so with all his opinions. Nothing
stayed, nothing passed that did not return; the circulation was
ceaseless and kept him young, and he mourned his wife the more
sincerely because he mourned her seldom.

It would have been simpler to tell Dr. Lal that he had changed his
mind about the party, but until the last minute he did not know
that he had changed it; indeed, he didn’t change it, it changed
itself. Unconquerable aversion welled. Mrs. Callendar, Mrs.
Lesley—no, he couldn’t stand them in his sorrow: they would guess
it—for he dowered the British matron with strange insight—and would
delight in torturing him, they would mock him to their husbands.
When he should have been ready, he stood at the Post Office,
writing a telegram to his children, and found on his return that
Dr. Lal had called for him, and gone on. Well, let him go on, as
befitted the coarseness of his nature. For his own part, he would
commune with the dead.

And unlocking a drawer, he took out his wife’s photograph. He gazed
at it, and tears spouted from his eyes. He thought, “How unhappy
I am!” But because he really was unhappy, another emotion soon
mingled with his self-pity: he desired to remember his wife and
could not. Why could he remember people whom he did not love? They
were always so vivid to him, whereas the more he looked at this
photograph, the less he saw. She had eluded him thus, ever since
they had carried her to her tomb. He had known that she would pass
from his hands and eyes, but had thought she could live in his
mind, not realizing that the very fact that we have loved the dead
increases their unreality, and that the more passionately we invoke
them the further they recede. A piece of brown cardboard and three
children—that was all that was left of his wife. It was unbearable,
and he thought again, “How unhappy I am!” and became happier. He
had breathed for an instant the mortal air that surrounds Orientals
and all men, and he drew back from it with a gasp, for he was
young. “Never, never shall I get over this,” he told himself. “Most
certainly my career is a failure, and my sons will be badly brought
up.” Since it was certain, he strove to avert it, and looked at
some notes he had made on a case at the hospital. Perhaps some day
a rich person might require this particular operation, and he gain
a large sum. The notes interesting him on their own account, he
locked the photograph up again. Its moment was over, and he did
not think about his wife any more.

After tea his spirits improved, and he went round to see Hamidullah.
Hamidullah had gone to the party, but his pony had not, so Aziz
borrowed it, also his friend’s riding breeches and polo mallet. He
repaired to the Maidan. It was deserted except at its rim, where
some bazaar youths were training. Training for what? They would
have found it hard to say, but the word had got into the air. Round
they ran, weedy and knock-kneed—the local physique was wretched—with
an expression on their faces not so much of determination as of a
determination to be determined. “Maharajah, salaam,” he called for
a joke. The youths stopped and laughed. He advised them not to
exert themselves. They promised they would not, and ran on.

Riding into the middle, he began to knock the ball about. He could
not play, but his pony could, and he set himself to learn, free
from all human tension. He forgot the whole damned business of
living as he scurried over the brown platter of the Maidan, with
the evening wind on his forehead, and the encircling trees soothing
his eyes. The ball shot away towards a stray subaltern who was also
practising; he hit it back to Aziz and called, “Send it along
again.”

“All right.”

The new-comer had some notion of what to do, but his horse had
none, and forces were equal. Concentrated on the ball, they somehow
became fond of one another, and smiled when they drew rein to rest.
Aziz liked soldiers—they either accepted you or swore at you, which
was preferable to the civilian’s hauteur—and the subaltern liked
anyone who could ride.

“Often play?” he asked.

“Never.”

“Let’s have another chukker.”

As he hit, his horse bucked and off he went, cried, “Oh God!” and
jumped on again. “Don’t you ever fall off?”

“Plenty.”

“Not you.”

They reined up again, the fire of good fellowship in their eyes.
But it cooled with their bodies, for athletics can only raise a
temporary glow. Nationality was returning, but before it could
exert its poison they parted, saluting each other. “If only they
were all like that,” each thought.

Now it was sunset. A few of his co-religionists had come to the
Maidan, and were praying with their faces towards Mecca. A Brahminy
Bull walked towards them, and Aziz, though disinclined to pray
himself, did not see why they should be bothered with the clumsy
and idolatrous animal. He gave it a tap with his polo mallet. As
he did so, a voice from the road hailed him: it was Dr. Panna Lal,
returning in high distress from the Collector’s party.

“Dr. Aziz, Dr. Aziz, where you been? I waited ten full minutes’
time at your house, then I went.”

“I am so awfully sorry—I was compelled to go to the Post Office.”

One of his own circle would have accepted this as meaning that he
had changed his mind, an event too common to merit censure. But
Dr. Lal, being of low extraction, was not sure whether an insult
had not been intended, and he was further annoyed because Aziz had
buffeted the Brahminy Bull. “Post Office? Do you not send your
servants?” he said.

“I have so few—my scale is very small.”

“Your servant spoke to me. I saw your servant.”

“But, Dr. Lal, consider. How could I send my servant when you were
coming: you come, we go, my house is left alone, my servant comes
back perhaps, and all my portable property has been carried away
by bad characters in the meantime. Would you have that? The cook
is deaf—I can never count on my cook—and the boy is only a little
boy. Never, never do I and Hassan leave the house at the same time
together. It is my fixed rule.” He said all this and much more out
of civility, to save Dr. Lal’s face. It was not offered as truth
and should not have been criticized as such. But the other
demolished it—an easy and ignoble task. “Even if this so, what
prevents leaving a chit saying where you go?” and so on. Aziz
detested ill breeding, and made his pony caper. “Farther away, or
mine will start out of sympathy,” he wailed, revealing the true
source of his irritation. “It has been so rough and wild this
afternoon. It spoiled some most valuable blossoms in the club
garden, and had to be dragged back by four men. English ladies and
gentlemen looking on, and the Collector Sahib himself taking a
note. But, Dr. Aziz, I’ll not take up your valuable time. This will
not interest you, who have so many engagements and telegrams. I am
just a poor old doctor who thought right to pay my respects when
I was asked and where I was asked. Your absence, I may remark, drew
commentaries.”

“They can damn well comment.”

“It is fine to be young. Damn well! Oh, very fine. Damn whom?”

“I go or not as I please.”

“Yet you promise me, and then fabricate this tale of a telegram.
Go forward, Dapple.”

They went, and Aziz had a wild desire to make an enemy for life.
He could do it so easily by galloping near them. He did it. Dapple
bolted. He thundered back on to the Maidan. The glory of his play
with the subaltern remained for a little, he galloped and swooped
till he poured with sweat, and until he returned the pony to
Hamidullah’s stable he felt the equal of any man. Once on his feet,
he had creeping fears. Was he in bad odour with the powers that
be? Had he offended the Collector by absenting himself? Dr. Panna
Lal was a person of no importance, yet was it wise to have
quarrelled even with him? The complexion of his mind turned from
human to political. He thought no longer, “Can I get on with
people?” but “Are they stronger than I?” breathing the prevalent
miasma.

At his home a chit was awaiting him, bearing the Government stamp.
It lay on his table like a high explosive, which at a touch might
blow his flimsy bungalow to bits. He was going to be cashiered
because he had not turned up at the party. When he opened the note,
it proved to be quite different; an invitation from Mr. Fielding,
the Principal of Government College, asking him to come to tea the
day after to-morrow. His spirits revived with violence. They would
have revived in any case, for he possessed a soul that could suffer
but not stifle, and led a steady life beneath his mutability. But
this invitation gave him particular joy, because Fielding had asked
him to tea a month ago, and he had forgotten about it—never
answered, never gone, just forgotten.

And here came a second invitation, without a rebuke or even an
allusion to his slip. Here was true courtesy—the civil deed that
shows the good heart—and snatching up his pen he wrote an
affectionate reply, and hurried back for news to Hamidullah’s. For
he had never met the Principal, and believed that the one serious
gap in his life was going to be filled. He longed to know everything
about the splendid fellow—his salary, preferences, antecedents,
how best one might please him. But Hamidullah was still out, and
Mahmoud Ali, who was in, would only make silly rude jokes about
the party.




  CHAPTER VII


This Mr. Fielding had been caught by India late. He was over forty
when he entered that oddest portal, the Victoria Terminus at
Bombay, and—having bribed a European ticket inspector—took his
luggage into the compartment of his first tropical train. The
journey remained in his mind as significant. Of his two carriage
companions one was a youth, fresh to the East like himself, the
other a seasoned Anglo-Indian of his own age. A gulf divided him
from either; he had seen too many cities and men to be the first
or to become the second. New impressions crowded on him, but they
were not the orthodox new impressions; the past conditioned them,
and so it was with his mistakes. To regard an Indian as if he were
an Italian is not, for instance, a common error, nor perhaps a
fatal one, and Fielding often attempted analogies between this
peninsula and that other, smaller and more exquisitely shaped, that
stretches into the classic waters of the Mediterranean.

His career, though scholastic, was varied, and had included going
to the bad and repenting thereafter. By now he was a hard-bitten,
good-tempered, intelligent fellow on the verge of middle age, with
a belief in education. He did not mind whom he taught; public
schoolboys, mental defectives and policemen, had all come his way,
and he had no objection to adding Indians. Through the influence
of friends, he was nominated Principal of the little college at
Chandrapore, liked it, and assumed he was a success. He did succeed
with his pupils, but the gulf between himself and his countrymen,
which he had noticed in the train, widened distressingly. He could
not at first see what was wrong. He was not unpatriotic, he always
got on with Englishmen in England, all his best friends were
English, so why was it not the same out here? Outwardly of the
large shaggy type, with sprawling limbs and blue eyes, he appeared
to inspire confidence until he spoke. Then something in his manner
puzzled people and failed to allay the distrust which his profession
naturally inspired. There needs must be this evil of brains in
India, but woe to him through whom they are increased! The feeling
grew that Mr. Fielding was a disruptive force, and rightly, for
ideas are fatal to caste, and he used ideas by that most potent
method—interchange. Neither a missionary nor a student, he was
happiest in the give-and-take of a private conversation. The world,
he believed, is a globe of men who are trying to reach one another
and can best do so by the help of good will plus culture and
intelligence—a creed ill suited to Chandrapore, but he had come
out too late to lose it. He had no racial feeling—not because he
was superior to his brother civilians, but because he had matured
in a different atmosphere, where the herd-instinct does not
flourish. The remark that did him most harm at the club was a silly
aside to the effect that the so-called white races are really
pinko-grey. He only said this to be cheery, he did not realize that
“white” has no more to do with a colour than “God save the King”
with a god, and that it is the height of impropriety to consider
what it does connote. The pinko-grey male whom he addressed was
subtly scandalized; his sense of insecurity was awoken, and he
communicated it to the rest of the herd.

Still, the men tolerated him for the sake of his good heart and
strong body; it was their wives who decided that he was not a sahib
really. They disliked him. He took no notice of them, and this,
which would have passed without comment in feminist England, did
him harm in a community where the male is expected to be lively
and helpful. Mr. Fielding never advised one about dogs or horses,
or dined, or paid his midday calls, or decorated trees for one’s
children at Christmas, and though he came to the club, it was only
to get his tennis or billiards, and to go. This was true. He had
discovered that it is possible to keep in with Indians and
Englishmen, but that he who would also keep in with Englishwomen
must drop the Indians. The two wouldn’t combine. Useless to blame
either party, useless to blame them for blaming one another. It
just was so, and one had to choose. Most Englishmen preferred their
own kinswomen, who, coming out in increasing numbers, made life on
the home pattern yearly more possible. He had found it convenient
and pleasant to associate with Indians and he must pay the price.
As a rule no Englishwoman entered the College except for official
functions, and if he invited Mrs. Moore and Miss Quested to tea,
it was because they were new-comers who would view everything with
an equal if superficial eye, and would not turn on a special voice
when speaking to his other guests.

The College itself had been slapped down by the Public Works
Department, but its grounds included an ancient garden and a
garden-house, and here he lived for much of the year. He was
dressing after a bath when Dr. Aziz was announced. Lifting up his
voice, he shouted from the bedroom, “Please make yourself at home.”
The remark was unpremeditated, like most of his actions; it was
what he felt inclined to say.

To Aziz it had a very definite meaning. “May I really, Mr. Fielding?
It’s very good of you,” he called back; “I like unconventional
behaviour so extremely.” His spirits flared up, he glanced round
the living-room. Some luxury in it, but no order—nothing to
intimidate poor Indians. It was also a very beautiful room, opening
into the garden through three high arches of wood. “The fact is I
have long wanted to meet you,” he continued. “I have heard so much
about your warm heart from the Nawab Bahadur. But where is one to
meet in a wretched hole like Chandrapore?” He came close up to the
door. “When I was greener here, I’ll tell you what. I used to wish
you to fall ill so that we could meet that way.” They laughed, and
encouraged by his success he began to improvise. “I said to myself,
How does Mr. Fielding look this morning? Perhaps pale. And the
Civil Surgeon is pale too, he will not be able to attend upon him
when the shivering commences. I should have been sent for instead.
Then we would have had jolly talks, for you are a celebrated
student of Persian poetry.”

“You know me by sight, then.”

“Of course, of course. You know me?”

“I know you very well by name.”

“I have been here such a short time, and always in the bazaar. No
wonder you have never seen me, and I wonder you know my name. I
say, Mr. Fielding?”

“Yes?”

“Guess what I look like before you come out. That will be a kind
of game.”

“You’re five feet nine inches high,” said Fielding, surmising this
much through the ground glass of the bedroom door.

“Jolly good. What next? Have I not a venerable white beard?”

“Blast!”

“Anything wrong?”

“I’ve stamped on my last collar stud.”

“Take mine, take mine.”

“Have you a spare one?”

“Yes, yes, one minute.”

“Not if you’re wearing it yourself.”

“No, no, one in my pocket.” Stepping aside, so that his outline
might vanish, he wrenched off his collar, and pulled out of his
shirt the back stud, a gold stud, which was part of a set that his
brother-in-law had brought him from Europe. “Here it is,” he cried.

“Come in with it if you don’t mind the unconventionality.”

“One minute again.” Replacing his collar, he prayed that it would
not spring up at the back during tea. Fielding’s bearer, who was
helping him to dress, opened the door for him.

“Many thanks.” They shook hands smiling. He began to look round,
as he would have with any old friend. Fielding was not surprised
at the rapidity of their intimacy. With so emotional a people it
was apt to come at once or never, and he and Aziz, having heard
only good of each other, could afford to dispense with preliminaries.

“But I always thought that Englishmen kept their rooms so tidy. It
seems that this is not so. I need not be so ashamed.” He sat down
gaily on the bed; then, forgetting himself entirely, drew up his
legs and folded them under him. “Everything ranged coldly on
shelves was what _I_ thought.—I say, Mr. Fielding, is the stud
going to go in?”

“I hae ma doots.”

“What’s that last sentence, please? Will you teach me some new
words and so improve my English?”

Fielding doubted whether “everything ranged coldly on shelves”
could be improved. He was often struck with the liveliness with
which the younger generation handled a foreign tongue. They altered
the idiom, but they could say whatever they wanted to say quickly;
there were none of the babuisms ascribed to them up at the club.
But then the club moved slowly; it still declared that few
Mohammedans and no Hindus would eat at an Englishman’s table, and
that all Indian ladies were in impenetrable purdah. Individually
it knew better; as a club it declined to change.

“Let me put in your stud. I see . . . the shirt back’s hole is
rather small and to rip it wider a pity.”

“Why in hell does one wear collars at all?” grumbled Fielding as
he bent his neck.

“We wear them to pass the Police.”

“What’s that?”

“If I’m biking in English dress—starch collar, hat with ditch—they
take no notice. When I wear a fez, they cry, ‘Your lamp’s out!’
Lord Curzon did not consider this when he urged natives of India
to retain their picturesque costumes.—Hooray! Stud’s gone
in.—Sometimes I shut my eyes and dream I have splendid clothes
again and am riding into battle behind Alamgir. Mr. Fielding, must
not India have been beautiful then, with the Mogul Empire at its
height and Alamgir reigning at Delhi upon the Peacock Throne?”

“Two ladies are coming to tea to meet you—I think you know them.”

“Meet me? I know no ladies.”

“Not Mrs. Moore and Miss Quested?”

“Oh yes—I remember.” The romance at the mosque had sunk out of his
consciousness as soon as it was over. “An excessively aged lady;
but will you please repeat the name of her companion?”

“Miss Quested.”

“Just as you wish.” He was disappointed that other guests were
coming, for he preferred to be alone with his new friend.

“You can talk to Miss Quested about the Peacock Throne if you
like—she’s artistic, they say.”

“Is she a Post Impressionist?”

“Post Impressionism, indeed! Come along to tea. This world is
getting too much for me altogether.”

Aziz was offended. The remark suggested that he, an obscure Indian,
had no right to have heard of Post Impressionism—a privilege
reserved for the Ruling Race, that. He said stiffly, “I do not
consider Mrs. Moore my friend, I only met her accidentally in my
mosque,” and was adding “a single meeting is too short to make a
friend,” but before he could finish the sentence the stiffness
vanished from it, because he felt Fielding’s fundamental good will.
His own went out to it, and grappled beneath the shifting tides of
emotion which can alone bear the voyager to an anchorage but may
also carry him across it on to the rocks. He was safe really—as
safe as the shore-dweller who can only understand stability and
supposes that every ship must be wrecked, and he had sensations
the shore-dweller cannot know. Indeed, he was sensitive rather than
responsive. In every remark he found a meaning, but not always the
true meaning, and his life though vivid was largely a dream.
Fielding, for instance, had not meant that Indians are obscure,
but that Post Impressionism is; a gulf divided his remark from Mrs.
Turton’s “Why, they speak English,” but to Aziz the two sounded
alike. Fielding saw that something had gone wrong, and equally that
it had come right, but he didn’t fidget, being an optimist where
personal relations were concerned, and their talk rattled on as
before.

“Besides the ladies I am expecting one of my assistants—Narayan
Godbole.”

“Oho, the Deccani Brahman!”

“He wants the past back too, but not precisely Alamgir.”

“I should think not. Do you know what Deccani Brahmans say? That
England conquered India from them—from them, mind, and not from
the Moguls. Is not that like their cheek? They have even bribed it
to appear in text-books, for they are so subtle and immensely rich.
Professor Godbole must be quite unlike all other Deccani Brahmans
from all I can hear say. A most sincere chap.”

“Why don’t you fellows run a club in Chandrapore, Aziz?”

“Perhaps—some day . . . just now I see Mrs. Moore and—what’s her
name—coming.”

How fortunate that it was an “unconventional” party, where
formalities are ruled out! On this basis Aziz found the English
ladies easy to talk to, he treated them like men. Beauty would have
troubled him, for it entails rules of its own, but Mrs. Moore was
so old and Miss Quested so plain that he was spared this anxiety.
Adela’s angular body and the freckles on her face were terrible
defects in his eyes, and he wondered how God could have been so
unkind to any female form. His attitude towards her remained
entirely straightforward in consequence.

“I want to ask you something, Dr. Aziz,” she began. “I heard from
Mrs. Moore how helpful you were to her in the mosque, and how
interesting. She learnt more about India in those few minutes’ talk
with you than in the three weeks since we landed.”

“Oh, please do not mention a little thing like that. Is there
anything else I may tell you about my country?”

“I want you to explain a disappointment we had this morning; it
must be some point of Indian etiquette.”

“There honestly is none,” he replied. “We are by nature a most
informal people.”

“I am afraid we must have made some blunder and given offence,”
said Mrs. Moore.

“That is even more impossible. But may I know the facts?”

“An Indian lady and gentleman were to send their carriage for us
this morning at nine. It has never come. We waited and waited and
waited; we can’t think what happened.”

“Some misunderstanding,” said Fielding, seeing at once that it was
the type of incident that had better not be cleared up.

“Oh no, it wasn’t that,” Miss Quested persisted. “They even gave
up going to Calcutta to entertain us. We must have made some stupid
blunder, we both feel sure.”

“I wouldn’t worry about that.”

“Exactly what Mr. Heaslop tells me,” she retorted, reddening a
little. “If one doesn’t worry, how’s one to understand?”

The host was inclined to change the subject, but Aziz took it up
warmly, and on learning fragments of the delinquents’ name
pronounced that they were Hindus.

“Slack Hindus—they have no idea of society; I know them very well
because of a doctor at the hospital. Such a slack, unpunctual
fellow! It is as well you did not go to their house, for it would
give you a wrong idea of India. Nothing sanitary. I think for my
own part they grew ashamed of their house and that is why they did
not send.”

“That’s a notion,” said the other man.

“I do so hate mysteries,” Adela announced.

“We English do.”

“I dislike them not because I’m English, but from my own personal
point of view,” she corrected.

“I like mysteries but I rather dislike muddles,” said Mrs. Moore.

“A mystery is a muddle.”

“Oh, do you think so, Mr. Fielding?”

“A mystery is only a high-sounding term for a muddle. No advantage
in stirring it up, in either case. Aziz and I know well that
India’s a muddle.”

“India’s—— Oh, what an alarming idea!”

“There’ll be no muddle when you come to see me,” said Aziz, rather
out of his depth. “Mrs. Moore and everyone—I invite you all—oh,
please.”

The old lady accepted: she still thought the young doctor
excessively nice; moreover, a new feeling, half languor, half
excitement, bade her turn down any fresh path. Miss Quested accepted
out of adventure. She also liked Aziz, and believed that when she
knew him better he would unlock his country for her. His invitation
gratified her, and she asked him for his address.

Aziz thought of his bungalow with horror. It was a detestable
shanty near a low bazaar. There was practically only one room in
it, and that infested with small black flies. “Oh, but we will talk
of something else now,” he exclaimed. “I wish I lived here. See
this beautiful room! Let us admire it together for a little. See
those curves at the bottom of the arches. What delicacy! It is the
architecture of Question and Answer. Mrs. Moore, you are in India;
I am not joking.” The room inspired him. It was an audience hall
built in the eighteenth century for some high official, and though
of wood had reminded Fielding of the Loggia de’ Lanzi at Florence.
Little rooms, now Europeanized, clung to it on either side, but
the central hall was unpapered and unglassed, and the air of the
garden poured in freely. One sat in public—on exhibition, as it
were—in full view of the gardeners who were screaming at the birds
and of the man who rented the tank for the cultivation of water
chestnut. Fielding let the mango trees too—there was no knowing
who might not come in—and his servants sat on his steps night and
day to discourage thieves. Beautiful certainly, and the Englishman
had not spoilt it, whereas Aziz in an occidental moment would have
hung Maude Goodmans on the walls. Yet there was no doubt to whom
the room really belonged. . . .

“I am doing justice here. A poor widow who has been robbed comes
along and I give her fifty rupees, to another a hundred, and so on
and so on. I should like that.”

Mrs. Moore smiled, thinking of the modern method as exemplified in
her son. “Rupees don’t last for ever, I’m afraid,” she said.

“Mine would. God would give me more when he saw I gave. Always be
giving, like the Nawab Bahadur. My father was the same, that is
why he died poor.” And pointing about the room he peopled it with
clerks and officials, all benevolent because they lived long ago.
“So we would sit giving for ever—on a carpet instead of chairs,
that is the chief change between now and then, but I think we would
never punish anyone.”

The ladies agreed.

“Poor criminal, give him another chance. It only makes a man worse
to go to prison and be corrupted.” His face grew very tender—the
tenderness of one incapable of administration, and unable to grasp
that if the poor criminal is let off he will again rob the poor
widow. He was tender to everyone except a few family enemies whom
he did not consider human: on these he desired revenge. He was even
tender to the English; he knew at the bottom of his heart that they
could not help being so cold and odd and circulating like an ice
stream through his land. “We punish no one, no one,” he repeated,
“and in the evening we will give a great banquet with a nautch and
lovely girls shall shine on every side of the tank with fireworks
in their hands, and all shall be feasting and happiness until the
next day, when there shall be justice as before—fifty rupees, a
hundred, a thousand—till peace comes. Ah, why didn’t we live in
that time?—But are you admiring Mr. Fielding’s house? Do look how
the pillars are painted blue, and the verandah’s pavilions—what do
you call them?—that are above us inside are blue also. Look at the
carving on the pavilions. Think of the hours it took. Their little
roofs are curved to imitate bamboo. So pretty—and the bamboos
waving by the tank outside. Mrs. Moore! Mrs. Moore!”

“Well?” she said, laughing.

“You remember the water by our mosque? It comes down and fills this
tank—a skilful arrangement of the Emperors. They stopped here going
down into Bengal. They loved water. Wherever they went they created
fountains, gardens, hammams. I was telling Mr. Fielding I would
give anything to serve them.”

He was wrong about the water, which no Emperor, however skilful,
can cause to gravitate uphill; a depression of some depth together
with the whole of Chandrapore lay between the mosque and Fielding’s
house. Ronny would have pulled him up, Turton would have wanted to
pull him up, but restrained himself. Fielding did not even want to
pull him up; he had dulled his craving for verbal truth and cared
chiefly for truth of mood. As for Miss Quested, she accepted
everything Aziz said as true verbally. In her ignorance, she
regarded him as “India,” and never surmised that his outlook was
limited and his method inaccurate, and that no one is India.

He was now much excited, chattering away hard, and even saying damn
when he got mixed up in his sentences. He told them of his
profession, and of the operations he had witnessed and performed,
and he went into details that scared Mrs. Moore, though Miss
Quested mistook them for proofs of his broad-mindedness; she had
heard such talk at home in advanced academic circles, deliberately
free. She supposed him to be emancipated as well as reliable, and
placed him on a pinnacle which he could not retain. He was high
enough for the moment, to be sure, but not on any pinnacle. Wings
bore him up, and flagging would deposit him.

The arrival of Professor Godbole quieted him somewhat, but it
remained his afternoon. The Brahman, polite and enigmatic, did not
impede his eloquence, and even applauded it. He took his tea at a
little distance from the outcasts, from a low table placed slightly
behind him, to which he stretched back, and as it were encountered
food by accident; all feigned indifference to Professor Godbole’s
tea. He was elderly and wizen with a grey moustache and grey-blue
eyes, and his complexion was as fair as a European’s. He wore a
turban that looked like pale purple macaroni, coat, waistcoat,
dhoti, socks with clocks. The clocks matched the turban, and his
whole appearance suggested harmony—as if he had reconciled the
products of East and West, mental as well as physical, and could
never be discomposed. The ladies were interested in him, and hoped
that he would supplement Dr. Aziz by saying something about
religion. But he only ate—ate and ate, smiling, never letting his
eyes catch sight of his hand.

Leaving the Mogul Emperors, Aziz turned to topics that could
distress no one. He described the ripening of the mangoes, and how
in his boyhood he used to run out in the Rains to a big mango grove
belonging to an uncle and gorge there. “Then back with water
streaming over you and perhaps rather a pain inside. But I did not
mind. All my friends were paining with me. We have a proverb in
Urdu: ‘What does unhappiness matter when we are all unhappy
together?’ which comes in conveniently after mangoes. Miss Quested,
do wait for mangoes. Why not settle altogether in India?”

“I’m afraid I can’t do that,” said Adela. She made the remark
without thinking what it meant. To her, as to the three men, it
seemed in key with the rest of the conversation, and not for
several minutes—indeed, not for half an hour—did she realize that
it was an important remark, and ought to have been made in the
first place to Ronny.

“Visitors like you are too rare.”

“They are indeed,” said Professor Godbole. “Such affability is
seldom seen. But what can we offer to detain them?”

“Mangoes, mangoes.”

They laughed. “Even mangoes can be got in England now,” put in
Fielding. “They ship them in ice-cold rooms. You can make India in
England apparently, just as you can make England in India.”

“Frightfully expensive in both cases,” said the girl.

“I suppose so.”

“And nasty.”

But the host wouldn’t allow the conversation to take this heavy
turn. He turned to the old lady, who looked flustered and put
out—he could not imagine why—and asked about her own plans. She
replied that she should like to see over the College. Everyone
immediately rose, with the exception of Professor Godbole, who was
finishing a banana.

“Don’t you come too, Adela; you dislike institutions.”

“Yes, that is so,” said Miss Quested, and sat down again.

Aziz hesitated. His audience was splitting up. The more familiar
half was going, but the more attentive remained. Reflecting that
it was an “unconventional” afternoon, he stopped.

Talk went on as before. Could one offer the visitors unripe mangoes
in a fool? “I speak now as a doctor: no.” Then the old man said,
“But I will send you up a few healthy sweets. I will give myself
that pleasure.”

“Miss Quested, Professor Godbole’s sweets are delicious,” said Aziz
sadly, for he wanted to send sweets too and had no wife to cook
them. “They will give you a real Indian treat. Ah, in my poor
position I can give you nothing.”

“I don’t know why you say that, when you have so kindly asked us
to your house.”

He thought again of his bungalow with horror. Good heavens, the
stupid girl had taken him at his word! What was he to do? “Yes,
all that is settled,” he cried.

“I invite you all to see me in the Marabar Caves.”

“I shall be delighted.”

“Oh, that is a most magnificent entertainment compared to my poor
sweets. But has not Miss Quested visited our caves already?”

“No. I’ve not even heard of them.”

“Not heard of them?” both cried. “The Marabar Caves in the Marabar
Hills?”

“We hear nothing interesting up at the club. Only tennis and
ridiculous gossip.”

The old man was silent, perhaps feeling that it was unseemly of
her to criticize her race, perhaps fearing that if he agreed she
would report him for disloyalty. But the young man uttered a rapid
“I know.”

“Then tell me everything you will, or I shall never understand
India. Are they the hills I sometimes see in the evening? What are
these caves?”

Aziz undertook to explain, but it presently appeared that he had
never visited the caves himself—had always been “meaning” to go,
but work or private business had prevented him, and they were so
far. Professor Godbole chaffed him pleasantly. “My dear young sir,
the pot and the kettle! Have you ever heard of that useful proverb?”

“Are they large caves?” she asked.

“No, not large.”

“Do describe them, Professor Godbole.”

“It will be a great honour.” He drew up his chair and an expression
of tension came over his face. Taking the cigarette box, she
offered to him and to Aziz, and lit up herself. After an impressive
pause he said: “There is an entrance in the rock which you enter,
and through the entrance is the cave.”

“Something like the caves at Elephanta?”

“Oh no, not at all; at Elephanta there are sculptures of Siva and
Parvati. There are no sculptures at Marabar.”

“They are immensely holy, no doubt,” said Aziz, to help on the
narrative.

“Oh no, oh no.”

“Still, they are ornamented in some way.”

“Oh no.”

“Well, why are they so famous? We all talk of the famous Marabar
Caves. Perhaps that is our empty brag.”

“No, I should not quite say that.”

“Describe them to this lady, then.”

“It will be a great pleasure.” He forewent the pleasure, and Aziz
realized that he was keeping back something about the caves. He
realized because he often suffered from similar inhibitions himself.
Sometimes, to the exasperation of Major Callendar, he would pass
over the one relevant fact in a position, to dwell on the hundred
irrelevant. The Major accused him of disingenuousness, and was
roughly right, but only roughly. It was rather that a power he
couldn’t control capriciously silenced his mind. Godbole had been
silenced now; no doubt not willingly, he was concealing something.
Handled subtly, he might regain control and announce that the
Marabar Caves were—full of stalactites, perhaps; Aziz led up to
this, but they weren’t.

The dialogue remained light and friendly, and Adela had no
conception of its underdrift. She did not know that the comparatively
simple mind of the Mohammedan was encountering Ancient Night. Aziz
played a thrilling game. He was handling a human toy that refused
to work—he knew that much. If it worked, neither he nor Professor
Godbole would be the least advantaged, but the attempt enthralled
him and was akin to abstract thought. On he chattered, defeated at
every move by an opponent who would not even admit that a move had
been made, and further than ever from discovering what, if anything,
was extraordinary about the Marabar Caves.

Into this Ronny dropped.

With an annoyance he took no trouble to conceal, he called from
the garden: “What’s happened to Fielding? Where’s my mother?”

“Good evening!” she replied coolly.

“I want you and mother at once. There’s to be polo.”

“I thought there was to be no polo.”

“Everything’s altered. Some soldier men have come in. Come along
and I’ll tell you about it.”

“Your mother will return shortly, sir,” said Professor Godbole,
who had risen with deference. “There is but little to see at our
poor college.”

Ronny took no notice, but continued to address his remarks to
Adela; he had hurried away from his work to take her to see the
polo, because he thought it would give her pleasure. He did not
mean to be rude to the two men, but the only link he could be
conscious of with an Indian was the official, and neither happened
to be his subordinate. As private individuals he forgot them.

Unfortunately Aziz was in no mood to be forgotten. He would not
give up the secure and intimate note of the last hour. He had not
risen with Godbole, and now, offensively friendly, called from his
seat, “Come along up and join us, Mr. Heaslop; sit down till your
mother turns up.”

Ronny replied by ordering one of Fielding’s servants to fetch his
master at once.

“He may not understand that. Allow me——” Aziz repeated the order
idiomatically.

Ronny was tempted to retort; he knew the type; he knew all the
types, and this was the spoilt Westernized. But he was a servant
of the Government, it was his job to avoid “incidents,” so he said
nothing, and ignored the provocation that Aziz continued to offer.
Aziz was provocative. Everything he said had an impertinent flavour
or jarred. His wings were failing, but he refused to fall without
a struggle. He did not mean to be impertinent to Mr. Heaslop, who
had never done him harm, but here was an Anglo-Indian who must
become a man before comfort could be regained. He did not mean to
be greasily confidential to Miss Quested, only to enlist her
support; nor to be loud and jolly towards Professor Godbole. A
strange quartette—he fluttering to the ground, she puzzled by the
sudden ugliness, Ronny fuming, the Brahman observing all three,
but with downcast eyes and hands folded, as if nothing was
noticeable. A scene from a play, thought Fielding, who now saw them
from the distance across the garden grouped among the blue pillars
of his beautiful hall.

“Don’t trouble to come, mother,” Ronny called; “we’re just
starting.” Then he hurried to Fielding, drew him aside and said
with pseudo-heartiness, “I say, old man, do excuse me, but I think
perhaps you oughtn’t to have left Miss Quested alone.”

“I’m sorry, what’s up?” replied Fielding, also trying to be genial.

“Well . . . I’m the sun-dried bureaucrat, no doubt; still, I don’t
like to see an English girl left smoking with two Indians.”

“She stopped, as she smokes, by her own wish, old man.”

“Yes, that’s all right in England.”

“I really can’t see the harm.”

“If you can’t see, you can’t see. . . . Can’t you see that fellow’s
a bounder?”

Aziz flamboyant, was patronizing Mrs. Moore.

“He isn’t a bounder,” protested Fielding. “His nerves are on edge,
that’s all.”

“What should have upset his precious nerves?”

“I don’t know. He was all right when I left.”

“Well, it’s nothing I’ve said,” said Ronny reassuringly. “I never
even spoke to him.”

“Oh well, come along now, and take your ladies away; the catastrophe
over.”

“Fielding . . . don’t think I’m taking it badly, or anything of
that sort. . . . I suppose you won’t come on to the polo with us?
We should all be delighted.”

“I’m afraid I can’t, thanks all the same. I’m awfully sorry you
feel I’ve been remiss. I didn’t mean to be.”

So the leave-taking began. Every one was cross or wretched. It was
as if irritation exuded from the very soil. Could one have been so
petty on a Scotch moor or an Italian alp? Fielding wondered
afterwards. There seemed no reserve of tranquillity to draw upon
in India.

Either none, or else tranquillity swallowed up everything, as it
appeared to do for Professor Godbole. Here was Aziz all shoddy and
odious, Mrs. Moore and Miss Quested both silly, and he himself and
Heaslop both decorous on the surface, but detestable really, and
detesting each other.

“Good-bye, Mr. Fielding, and thank you so much. . . . What lovely
College buildings!”

“Good-bye, Mrs. Moore.”

“Good-bye, Mr. Fielding. Such an interesting afternoon. . . .”

“Good-bye, Miss Quested.”

“Good-bye, Dr. Aziz.”

“Good-bye, Mrs. Moore.”

“Good-bye, Dr. Aziz.”

“Good-bye, Miss Quested.” He pumped her hand up and down to show
that he felt at ease. “You’ll jolly jolly well not forget those
caves, won’t you? I’ll fix the whole show up in a jiffy.”

“Thank you. . .

Inspired by the devil to a final effort, he added, “What a shame
you leave India so soon! Oh, do reconsider your decision, do stay.”

“Good-bye, Professor Godbole,” she continued, suddenly agitated.
“It’s a shame we never heard you sing.”

“I may sing now,” he replied, and did.

His thin voice rose, and gave out one sound after another. At times
there seemed rhythm, at times there was the illusion of a Western
melody. But the ear, baffled repeatedly, soon lost any clue, and
wandered in a maze of noises, none harsh or unpleasant, none
intelligible. It was the song of an unknown bird. Only the servants
understood it. They began to whisper to one another. The man who
was gathering water chestnut came naked out of the tank, his lips
parted with delight, disclosing his scarlet tongue. The sounds
continued and ceased after a few moments as casually as they had
begun—apparently half through a bar, and upon the subdominant.

“Thanks so much: what was that?” asked Fielding.

“I will explain in detail. It was a religious song. I placed myself
in the position of a milkmaiden. I say to Shri Krishna, ‘Come! come
to me only.’ The god refuses to come. I grow humble and say: ‘Do
not come to me only. Multiply yourself into a hundred Krishnas,
and let one go to each of my hundred companions, but one, O Lord
of the Universe, come to me.’ He refuses to come. This is repeated
several times. The song is composed in a raga appropriate to the
present hour, which is the evening.”

“But He comes in some other song, I hope?” said Mrs. Moore gently.

“Oh no, he refuses to come,” repeated Godbole, perhaps not
understanding her question. “I say to Him, Come, come, come, come,
come, come. He neglects to come.”

Ronny’s steps had died away, and there was a moment of absolute
silence. No ripple disturbed the water, no leaf stirred.




  CHAPTER VIII


Although Miss Quested had known Ronny well in England, she felt
well advised to visit him before deciding to be his wife. India
had developed sides of his character that she had never admired.
His self-complacency, his censoriousness, his lack of subtlety,
all grew vivid beneath a tropic sky; he seemed more indifferent
than of old to what was passing in the minds of his fellows, more
certain that he was right about them or that if he was wrong it
didn’t matter. When proved wrong, he was particularly exasperating;
he always managed to suggest that she needn’t have bothered to
prove it. The point she made was never the relevant point, her
arguments conclusive but barren, she was reminded that he had
expert knowledge and she none, and that experience would not help
her because she could not interpret it. A Public School, London
University, a year at a crammer’s, a particular sequence of posts
in a particular province, a fall from a horse and a touch of fever
were presented to her as the only training by which Indians and
all who reside in their country can be understood; the only training
she could comprehend, that is to say, for of course above Ronny
there stretched the higher realms of knowledge, inhabited by
Callendars and Turtons, who had been not one year in the country
but twenty and whose instincts were superhuman. For himself he made
no extravagant claims; she wished he would. It was the qualified
bray of the callow official, the “I am not perfect, but——” that
got on her nerves.

How gross he had been at Mr. Fielding’s—spoiling the talk and
walking off in the middle of the haunting song! As he drove them
away in the tum-tum, her irritation became unbearable, and she did
not realize that much of it was directed against herself. She
longed for an opportunity to fly out at him, and since he felt
cross too, and they were both in India, an opportunity soon
occurred. They had scarcely left the College grounds before she
heard him say to his mother, who was with him on the front seat,
“What was that about caves?” and she promptly opened fire.

“Mrs. Moore, your delightful doctor has decided on a picnic,
instead of a party in his house; we are to meet him out there—you,
myself, Mr. Fielding, Professor Godbole—exactly the same party.”

“Out where?” asked Ronny.

“The Marabar Caves.”

“Well, I’m blessed,” he murmured after a pause. “Did he descend to
any details?”

“He did not. If you had spoken to him, we could have arranged
them.”

He shook his head laughing.

“Have I said anything funny?”

“I was only thinking how the worthy doctor’s collar climbed up his
neck.”

“I thought you were discussing the caves.”

“So I am. Aziz was exquisitely dressed, from tie-pin to spats, but
he had forgotten his back collar-stud, and there you have the
Indian all over: inattention to detail; the fundamental slackness
that reveals the race. Similarly, to ‘meet’ in the caves as if they
were the clock at Charing Cross, when they’re miles from a station
and each other.”

“Have you been to them?”

“No, but I know all about them, naturally.”

“Oh naturally!”

“Are you too pledged to this expedition, mother?”

“Mother is pledged to nothing,” said Mrs. Moore, rather unexpectedly.
“Certainly not to this polo. Will you drive up to the bungalow
first, and drop me there, please? I prefer to rest.”

“Drop me too,” said Adela. “I don’t want to watch polo either, I’m
sure.”

“Simpler to drop the polo,” said Ronny. Tired and disappointed, he
quite lost self-control, and added in a loud lecturing voice, “I
won’t have you messing about with Indians any more! If you want to
go to the Marabar Caves, you’ll go under British auspices.”

“I’ve never heard of these caves, I don’t know what or where they
are,” said Mrs. Moore, “but I really can’t have”—she tapped the
cushion beside her—“so much quarrelling and tiresomeness!”

The young people were ashamed. They dropped her at the bungalow
and drove on together to the polo, feeling it was the least they
could do. Their crackling bad humour left them, but the heaviness
of their spirit remained; thunderstorms seldom clear the air. Miss
Quested was thinking over her own behaviour, and didn’t like it at
all. Instead of weighing Ronny and herself, and coming to a reasoned
conclusion about marriage, she had incidentally, in the course of
a talk about mangoes, remarked to mixed company that she didn’t
mean to stop in India. Which meant that she wouldn’t marry Ronny:
but what a way to announce it, what a way for a civilized girl to
behave! She owed him an explanation, but unfortunately there was
nothing to explain. The “thorough talk” so dear to her principles
and temperament had been postponed until too late. There seemed no
point in being disagreeable to him and formulating her complaints
against his character at this hour of the day, which was the
evening. . . . The polo took place on the Maidan near the entrance
of Chandrapore city. The sun was already declining and each of the
trees held a premonition of night. They walked away from the
governing group to a distant seat, and there, feeling that it was
his due and her own, she forced out of herself the undigested
remark: “We must have a thorough talk, Ronny, I’m afraid.”

“My temper’s rotten, I must apologize,” was his reply. “I didn’t
mean to order you and mother about, but of course the way those
Bengalis let you down this morning annoyed me, and I don’t want
that sort of thing to keep happening.”

“It’s nothing to do with them that I . . .”

“No, but Aziz would make some similar muddle over the caves. He
meant nothing by the invitation, I could tell by his voice; it’s
just their way of being pleasant.”

“It’s something very different, nothing to do with caves, that I
wanted to talk over with you.” She gazed at the colourless grass.
“I’ve finally decided we are not going to be married, my dear boy.”

The news hurt Ronny very much. He had heard Aziz announce that she
would not return to the country, but had paid no attention to the
remark, for he never dreamt that an Indian could be a channel of
communication between two English people. He controlled himself
and said gently, “You never said we should marry, my dear girl;
you never bound either yourself or me—don’t let this upset you.”

She felt ashamed. How decent he was! He might force his opinions
down her throat, but did not press her to an “engagement,” because
he believed, like herself, in the sanctity of personal relationships:
it was this that had drawn them together at their first meeting,
which had occurred among the grand scenery of the English Lakes.
Her ordeal was over, but she felt it should have been more painful
and longer. Adela will not marry Ronny. It seemed slipping away
like a dream. She said, “But let us discuss things; it’s all so
frightfully important, we mustn’t make false steps. I want next to
hear your point of view about me—it might help us both.”

His manner was unhappy and reserved. “I don’t much believe in this
discussing—besides, I’m so dead with all this extra work Mohurram’s
bringing, if you’ll excuse me.”

“I only want everything to be absolutely clear between us, and to
answer any questions you care to put to me on my conduct.”

“But I haven’t got any questions. You’ve acted within your rights,
you were quite right to come out and have a look at me doing my
work, it was an excellent plan, and anyhow it’s no use talking
further—we should only get up steam.” He felt angry and bruised;
he was too proud to tempt her back, but he did not consider that
she had behaved badly, because where his compatriots were concerned
he had a generous mind.

“I suppose that there is nothing else; it’s unpardonable of me to
have given you and your mother all this bother,” said Miss Quested
heavily, and frowned up at the tree beneath which they were sitting.
A little green bird was observing her, so brilliant and neat that
it might have hopped straight out of a shop. On catching her eye
it closed its own, gave a small skip and prepared to go to bed.
Some Indian wild bird. “Yes, nothing else,” she repeated, feeling
that a profound and passionate speech ought to have been delivered
by one or both of them. “We’ve been awfully British over it, but
I suppose that’s all right.”

“As we are British, I suppose it is.”

“Anyhow we’ve not quarrelled, Ronny.”

“Oh, that would have been too absurd. Why should we quarrel?”

“I think we shall keep friends.”

“I know we shall.”

“Quite so.”

As soon as they had exchanged this admission, a wave of relief
passed through them both, and then transformed itself into a wave
of tenderness, and passed back. They were softened by their own
honesty, and began to feel lonely and unwise. Experiences, not
character, divided them; they were not dissimilar, as humans go;
indeed, when compared with the people who stood nearest to them in
point of space they became practically identical. The Bhil who was
holding an officer’s polo pony, the Eurasian who drove the Nawab
Bahadur’s car, the Nawab Bahadur himself, the Nawab Bahadur’s
debauched grandson—none would have examined a difficulty so frankly
and coolly. The mere fact of examination caused it to diminish. Of
course they were friends, and for ever. “Do you know what the name
of that green bird up above us is?” she asked, putting her shoulder
rather nearer to his.

“Bee-eater.”

“Oh no, Ronny, it has red bars on its wings.”

“Parrot,” he hazarded.

“Good gracious no.”

The bird in question dived into the dome of the tree. It was of no
importance, yet they would have liked to identify it, it would
somehow have solaced their hearts.

But nothing in India is identifiable, the mere asking of a question
causes it to disappear or to merge in something else.

“McBryde has an illustrated bird book,” he said dejectedly. “I’m
no good at all at birds, in fact I’m useless at any information
outside my own job. It’s a great pity.”

“So am I. I’m useless at everything.”

“What do I hear?” shouted the Nawab Bahadur at the top of his
voice, causing both of them to start. “What most improbable
statement have I heard? An English lady useless? No, no, no, no,
no.” He laughed genially, sure, within limits, of his welcome.

“Hallo, Nawab Bahadur! Been watching the polo again?” said Ronny
tepidly.

“I have, sahib, I have.”

“How do you do?” said Adela, likewise pulling herself together.
She held out her hand. The old gentleman judged from so wanton a
gesture that she was new to his country, but he paid little heed.
Women who exposed their face became by that one act so mysterious
to him that he took them at the valuation of their men folk rather
than at his own. Perhaps they were not immoral, and anyhow they
were not his affair. On seeing the City Magistrate alone with a
maiden at twilight, he had borne down on them with hospitable
intent. He had a new little car, and wished to place it at their
disposal; the City Magistrate would decide whether the offer was
acceptable.

Ronny was by this time rather ashamed of his curtness to Aziz and
Godbole, and here was an opportunity of showing that he could treat
Indians with consideration when they deserved it. So he said to
Adela, with the same sad friendliness that he had employed when
discussing the bird, “Would half an hour’s spin entertain you at
all?”

“Oughtn’t we to get back to the bungalow.”

“Why?” He gazed at her.

“I think perhaps I ought to see your mother and discuss future
plans.”

“That’s as you like, but there’s no hurry, is there?”

“Let me take you to the bungalow, and first the little spin,” cried
the old man, and hastened to the car.

“He may show you some aspect of the country I can’t, and he’s a
real loyalist. I thought you might care for a bit of a change.”

Determined to give him no more trouble, she agreed, but her desire
to see India had suddenly decreased. There had been a factitious
element in it.

How should they seat themselves in the car? The elegant grandson
had to be left behind. The Nawab Bahadur got up in front, for he
had no intention of neighbouring an English girl. “Despite my
advanced years, I am learning to drive,” he said. “Man can learn
everything if he will but try.” And foreseeing a further difficulty,
he added, “I do not do the actual steering. I sit and ask my
chauffeur questions, and thus learn the reason for everything that
is done before I do it myself. By this method serious and I may
say ludicrous accidents, such as befell one of my compatriots
during that delightful reception at the English Club, are avoided.
Our good Panna Lal! I hope, sahib, that great damage was not done
to your flowers. Let us have our little spin down the Gangavati
road. Half one league onwards!” He fell asleep.

Ronny instructed the chauffeur to take the Marabar road rather than
the Gangavati, since the latter was under repair, and settled
himself down beside the lady he had lost. The car made a burring
noise and rushed along a chaussée that ran upon an embankment above
melancholy fields. Trees of a poor quality bordered the road,
indeed the whole scene was inferior, and suggested that the
country-side was too vast to admit of excellence. In vain did each
item in it call out, “Come, come.”

There was not enough god to go round. The two young people conversed
feebly and felt unimportant. When the darkness began, it seemed to
well out of the meagre vegetation, entirely covering the fields
each side of them before it brimmed over the road. Ronny’s face
grew dim—an event that always increased her esteem for his
character. Her hand touched his, owing to a jolt, and one of the
thrills so frequent in the animal kingdom passed between them, and
announced that all their difficulties were only a lovers’ quarrel.
Each was too proud to increase the pressure, but neither withdrew
it, and a spurious unity descended on them, as local and temporary
as the gleam that inhabits a firefly. It would vanish in a moment,
perhaps to reappear, but the darkness is alone durable. And the
night that encircled them, absolute as it seemed, was itself only
a spurious unity, being modified by the gleams of day that leaked
up round the edges of the earth, and by the stars.

They gripped . . . bump, jump, a swerve, two wheels lifted in the
air, breaks on, bump with tree at edge of embankment, standstill.
An accident. A slight one. Nobody hurt. The Nawab Bahadur awoke.
He cried out in Arabic, and violently tugged his beard.

“What’s the damage?” enquired Ronny, after the moment’s pause that
he permitted himself before taking charge of a situation. The
Eurasian, inclined to be flustered, rallied to the sound of his
voice, and, every inch an Englishman, replied, “You give me five
minutes’ time, I’ll take you any dam anywhere.”

“Frightened, Adela?” He released her hand.

“Not a bit.”

“I consider not to be frightened the height of folly,” cried the
Nawab Bahadur quite rudely.

“Well, it’s all over now, tears are useless,” said Ronny,
dismounting. “We had some luck butting that tree.”

“All over . . . oh yes, the danger is past, let us smoke cigarettes,
let us do anything we please. Oh yes . . . enjoy ourselves—oh my
merciful God . . .” His words died into Arabic again.

“Wasn’t the bridge. We skidded.”

“We didn’t skid,” said Adela, who had seen the cause of the
accident, and thought everyone must have seen it too. “We ran into
an animal.”

A loud cry broke from the old man: his terror was disproportionate
and ridiculous.

“An animal?”

“A large animal rushed up out of the dark on the right and hit us.”

“By Jove, she’s right,” Ronny exclaimed. “The paint’s gone.”

“By Jove, sir, your lady is right,” echoed the Eurasian. Just by
the hinges of the door was a dent, and the door opened with
difficulty.

“Of course I’m right. I saw its hairy back quite plainly.”

“I say, Adela, what was it?”

“I don’t know the animals any better than the birds here—too big
for a goat.”

“Exactly, too big for a goat . . .” said the old man.

Ronny said, “Let’s go into this; let’s look for its tracks.”

“Exactly; you wish to borrow this electric torch.”

The English people walked a few steps back into the darkness,
united and happy. Thanks to their youth and upbringing, they were
not upset by the accident. They traced back the writhing of the
tyres to the source of their disturbance. It was just after the
exit from a bridge; the animal had probably come up out of the
nullah. Steady and smooth ran the marks of the car, ribbons neatly
nicked with lozenges, then all went mad. Certainly some external
force had impinged, but the road had been used by too many objects
for any one track to be legible, and the torch created such high
lights and black shadows that they could not interpret what it
revealed. Moreover, Adela in her excitement knelt and swept her
skirts about, until it was she if anyone who appeared to have
attacked the car. The incident was a great relief to them both.
They forgot their abortive personal relationship, and felt
adventurous as they muddled about in the dust.

“I believe it was a buffalo,” she called to their host, who had
not accompanied them.

“Exactly.”

“Unless it was a hyena.”

Ronny approved this last conjecture. Hyenas prowl in nullahs and
headlights dazzle them.

“Excellent, a hyena,” said the Indian with an angry irony and a
gesture at the night. “Mr. Harris!”

“Half a mo-ment. Give me ten minutes’ time.”

“Sahib says hyena.”

“Don’t worry Mr. Harris. He saved us from a nasty smash. Harris,
well done!”

“A smash, sahib, that would not have taken place had he obeyed and
taken us Gangavati side, instead of Marabar.”

“My fault that. I told him to come this way because the road’s
better. Mr. Lesley has made it pukka right up to the hills.”

“Ah, now I begin to understand.” Seeming to pull himself together,
he apologized slowly and elaborately for the accident. Ronny
murmured, “Not at all,” but apologies were his due, and should have
started sooner: because English people are so calm at a crisis, it
is not to be assumed that they are unimportant. The Nawab Bahadur
had not come out very well.

At that moment a large car approached from the opposite direction.
Ronny advanced a few steps down the road, and with authority in
his voice and gesture stopped it. It bore the inscription “Mudkul
State” across its bonnet. All friskiness and friendliness, Miss
Derek sat inside.

“Mr. Heaslop, Miss Quested, what are you holding up an innocent
female for?”

“We’ve had a breakdown.”

“But how putrid!”

“We ran into a hyena!”

“How absolutely rotten!”

“Can you give us a lift?”

“Yes, indeed.”

“Take me too,” said the Nawab Bahadur.

“Heh, what about me?” cried Mr. Harris.

“Now what’s all this? I’m not an omnibus,” said Miss Derek with
decision. “I’ve a harmonium and two dogs in here with me as it is.
I’ll take three of you if one’ll sit in front and nurse a pug. No
more.”

“I will sit in front,” said the Nawab Bahadur.

“Then hop in: I’ve no notion who you are.”

“Heh no, what about my dinner? I can’t be left alone all the
night.” Trying to look and feel like a European, the chauffeur
interposed aggressively. He still wore a topi, despite the darkness,
and his face, to which the Ruling Race had contributed little
beyond bad teeth, peered out of it pathetically, and seemed to say,
“What’s it all about? Don’t worry me so, you blacks and whites.
Here I am, stuck in dam India same as you, and you got to fit me
in better than this.”

“Nussu will bring you out some suitable dinner upon a bicycle,”
said the Nawab Bahadur, who had regained his usual dignity. “I
shall despatch him with all possible speed. Meanwhile, repair my
car.”

They sped off, and Mr. Harris, after a reproachful glance, squatted
down upon his hams. When English and Indians were both present, he
grew self-conscious, because he did not know to whom he belonged.
For a little he was vexed by opposite currents in his blood, then
they blended, and he belonged to no one but himself.

But Miss Derek was in tearing spirits. She had succeeded in stealing
the Mudkul car. Her Maharajah would be awfully sick, but she didn’t
mind, he could sack her if he liked. “I don’t believe in these
people letting you down,” she said. “If I didn’t snatch like the
devil, I should be nowhere. He doesn’t want the car, silly fool!
Surely it’s to the credit of his State I should be seen about in
it at Chandrapore during my leave. He ought to look at it that way.
Anyhow he’s got to look at it that way. My Maharani’s different—my
Maharani’s a dear. That’s her fox terrier, poor little devil. I
fished them out both with the driver. Imagine taking dogs to a
Chiefs’ Conference! As sensible as taking Chiefs, perhaps.” She
shrieked with laughter. “The harmonium—the harmonium’s my little
mistake, I own. They rather had me over the harmonium. I meant it
to stop on the train. Oh lor’!”

Ronny laughed with restraint. He did not approve of English people
taking service under the Native States, where they obtain a certain
amount of influence, but at the expense of the general prestige.
The humorous triumphs of a free lance are of no assistance to an
administrator, and he told the young lady that she would outdo
Indians at their own game if she went on much longer.

“They always sack me before that happens, and then I get another
job. The whole of India seethes with Maharanis and Ranis and Begums
who clamour for such as me.”

“Really. I had no idea.”

“How could you have any idea, Mr. Heaslop? What should he know
about Maharanis, Miss Quested? Nothing. At least I should hope
not.”

“I understand those big people are not particularly interesting,”
said Adela, quietly, disliking the young woman’s tone. Her hand
touched Ronny’s again in the darkness, and to the animal thrill
there was now added a coincidence of opinion.

“Ah, there you’re wrong. They’re priceless.”

“I would scarcely call her wrong,” broke out the Nawab Bahadur,
from his isolation on the front seat, whither they had relegated
him. “A Native State, a Hindu State, the wife of a ruler of a Hindu
State, may beyond doubt be a most excellent lady, and let it not
be for a moment supposed that I suggest anything against the
character of Her Highness the Maharani of Mudkul. But I fear she
will be uneducated, I fear she will be superstitious. Indeed, how
could she be otherwise? What opportunity of education has such a
lady had? Oh, superstition is terrible, terrible! oh, it is the
great defect in our Indian character!”—and as if to point his
criticism, the lights of the civil station appeared on a rise to
the right. He grew more and more voluble. “Oh, it is the duty of
each and every citizen to shake superstition off, and though I have
little experience of Hindu States, and none of this particular one,
namely Mudkul (the Ruler, I fancy, has a salute of but eleven
guns)—yet I cannot imagine that they have been as successful as
British India, where we see reason and orderliness spreading in
every direction, like a most health-giving flood!”

Miss Derek said “Golly!”

Undeterred by the expletive, the old man swept on. His tongue had
been loosed and his mind had several points to make. He wanted to
endorse Miss Quested’s remark that big people are not interesting,
because he was bigger himself than many an independent chief; at
the same time, he must neither remind nor inform her that he was
big, lest she felt she had committed a discourtesy. This was the
groundwork of his oration; worked in with it was his gratitude to
Miss Derek for the lift, his willingness to hold a repulsive dog
in his arms, and his general regret for the trouble he had caused
the human race during the evening. Also he wanted to be dropped
near the city to get hold of his cleaner, and to see what mischief
his grandson was up to. As he wove all these anxieties into a
single rope, he suspected that his audience felt no interest, and
that the City Magistrate fondled either maiden behind the cover of
the harmonium, but good breeding compelled him to continue; it was
nothing to him if they were bored, because he did not know what
boredom is, and it was nothing to him if they were licentious,
because God has created all races to be different. The accident
was over, and his life, equably useful, distinguished, happy, ran
on as before and expressed itself in streams of well-chosen words.

When this old geyser left them, Ronny made no comment, but talked
lightly about polo; Turton had taught him that it is sounder not
to discuss a man at once, and he reserved what he had to say on
the Nawab’s character until later in the evening. His hand, which
he had removed to say good-bye, touched Adela’s again; she caressed
it definitely, he responded, and their firm and mutual pressure
surely meant something. They looked at each other when they reached
the bungalow, for Mrs. Moore was inside it. It was for Miss Quested
to speak, and she said nervously, “Ronny, I should like to take
back what I said on the Maidan.” He assented, and they became
engaged to be married in consequence.

Neither had foreseen such a consequence. She had meant to revert
to her former condition of important and cultivated uncertainty,
but it had passed out of her reach at its appropriate hour. Unlike
the green bird or the hairy animal, she was labelled now. She felt
humiliated again, for she deprecated labels, and she felt too that
there should have been another scene between her lover and herself
at this point, something dramatic and lengthy. He was pleased
instead of distressed, he was surprised, but he had really nothing
to say. What indeed is there to say? To be or not to be married,
that was the question, and they had decided it in the affirmative.

“Come along and let’s tell the mater all this”—opening the
perforated zinc door that protected the bungalow from the swarms
of winged creatures. The noise woke the mater up. She had been
dreaming of the absent children who were so seldom mentioned, Ralph
and Stella, and did not at first grasp what was required of her.
She too had become used to thoughtful procrastination, and felt
alarmed when it came to an end.

When the announcement was over, he made a gracious and honest
remark. “Look here, both of you, see India if you like and as you
like—I know I made myself rather ridiculous at Fielding’s, but . . .
it’s different now. I wasn’t quite sure of myself.”

“My duties here are evidently finished, I don’t want to see India
now; now for my passage back,” was Mrs. Moore’s thought. She
reminded herself of all that a happy marriage means, and of her
own happy marriages, one of which had produced Ronny. Adela’s
parents had also been happily married, and excellent it was to see
the incident repeated by the younger generation. On and on! the
number of such unions would certainly increase as education spread
and ideals grew loftier, and characters firmer. But she was tired
by her visit to Government College, her feet ached, Mr. Fielding
had walked too fast and far, the young people had annoyed her in
the tum-tum, and given her to suppose they were breaking with each
other, and though it was all right now she could not speak as
enthusiastically of wedlock or of anything as she should have done.
Ronny was suited, now she must go home and help the others, if they
wished. She was past marrying herself, even unhappily; her function
was to help others, her reward to be informed that she was
sympathetic. Elderly ladies must not expect more than this.

They dined alone. There was much pleasant and affectionate talk
about the future. Later on they spoke of passing events, and Ronny
reviewed and recounted the day from his own point of view. It was
a different day from the women’s, because while they had enjoyed
themselves or thought, he had worked. Mohurram was approaching,
and as usual the Chandrapore Mohammedans were building paper towers
of a size too large to pass under the branches of a certain pepul
tree. One knew what happened next; the tower stuck, a Mohammedan
climbed up the pepul and cut the branch off, the Hindus protested,
there was a religious riot, and Heaven knew what, with perhaps the
troops sent for. There had been deputations and conciliation
committees under the auspices of Turton, and all the normal work
of Chandrapore had been hung up. Should the procession take another
route, or should the towers be shorter? The Mohammedans offered
the former, the Hindus insisted on the latter. The Collector had
favoured the Hindus, until he suspected that they had artificially
bent the tree nearer the ground. They said it sagged naturally.
Measurements, plans, an official visit to the spot. But Ronny had
not disliked his day, for it proved that the British were necessary
to India; there would certainly have been bloodshed without them.
His voice grew complacent again; he was here not to be pleasant
but to keep the peace, and now that Adela had promised to be his
wife, she was sure to understand.

“What does our old gentleman of the car think?” she asked, and her
negligent tone was exactly what he desired.

“Our old gentleman is helpful and sound, as he always is over
public affairs. You’ve seen in him our show Indian.”

“Have I really?”

“I’m afraid so. Incredible, aren’t they, even the best of them?
They’re all—they all forget their back collar studs sooner or
later. You’ve had to do with three sets of Indians to-day, the
Bhattacharyas, Aziz, and this chap, and it really isn’t a
coincidence that they’ve all let you down.”

“I like Aziz, Aziz is my real friend,” Mrs. Moore interposed.

“When the animal runs into us the Nawab loses his head, deserts
his unfortunate chauffeur, intrudes upon Miss Derek . . . no great
crimes, no great crimes, but no white man would have done it.”

“What animal?”

“Oh, we had a small accident on the Marabar road. Adela thinks it
was a hyena.”

“An accident?” she cried.

“Nothing; no one hurt. Our excellent host awoke much rattled from
his dreams, appeared to think it was our fault, and chanted exactly,
exactly.”

Mrs. Moore shivered, “A ghost!” But the idea of a ghost scarcely
passed her lips. The young people did not take it up, being occupied
with their own outlooks, and deprived of support it perished, or
was reabsorbed into the part of the mind that seldom speaks.

“Yes, nothing criminal,” Ronny summed up, “but there’s the native,
and there’s one of the reasons why we don’t admit him to our clubs,
and how a decent girl like Miss Derek can take service under
natives puzzles me. . . . But I must get on with my work. Krishna!”
Krishna was the peon who should have brought the files from his
office. He had not turned up, and a terrific row ensued. Ronny
stormed, shouted, howled, and only the experienced observer could
tell that he was not angry, did not much want the files, and only
made a row because it was the custom. Servants, quite understanding,
ran slowly in circles, carrying hurricane lamps. Krishna the earth,
Krishna the stars replied, until the Englishman was appeased by
their echoes, fined the absent peon eight annas, and sat down to
his arrears in the next room.

“Will you play Patience with your future mother-in-law, dear Adela,
or does it seem too tame?”

“I should like to—I don’t feel a bit excited—I’m just glad it’s
settled up at last, but I’m not conscious of vast changes. We are
all three the same people still.”

“That’s much the best feeling to have.” She dealt out the first
row of  “demon.”

“I suppose so,” said the girl thoughtfully.

“I feared at Mr. Fielding’s that it might be settled the other way
. . . black knave on a red queen. . . .” They chatted gently about
the game.

Presently Adela said: “You heard me tell Aziz and Godbole I wasn’t
stopping in their country. I didn’t mean it, so why did I say it?
I feel I haven’t been—frank enough, attentive enough, or something.
It’s as if I got everything out of proportion. You have been so
very good to me, and I meant to be good when I sailed, but somehow
I haven’t been. . . . Mrs. Moore, if one isn’t absolutely honest,
what is the use of existing?”

She continued to lay out her cards. The words were obscure, but
she understood the uneasiness that produced them. She had
experienced it twice herself, during her own engagements—this vague
contrition and doubt. All had come right enough afterwards and
doubtless would this time—marriage makes most things right enough.
“I wouldn’t worry,” she said. “It’s partly the odd surroundings;
you and I keep on attending to trifles instead of what’s important;
we are what the people here call ‘new.’”

“You mean that my bothers are mixed up with India?”

“India’s——” She stopped.

“What made you call it a ghost?”

“Call what a ghost?”

“The animal thing that hit us. Didn’t you say ‘Oh, a ghost,’ in
passing.”

“I couldn’t have been thinking of what I was saying.”

“It was probably a hyena, as a matter of fact.”

“Ah, very likely.”

And they went on with their Patience. Down in Chandrapore the Nawab
Bahadur waited for his car. He sat behind his town house (a small
unfurnished building which he rarely entered) in the midst of the
little court that always improvises itself round Indians of
position. As if turbans were the natural product of darkness a
fresh one would occasionally froth to the front, incline itself
towards him, and retire. He was preoccupied, his diction was
appropriate to a religious subject. Nine years previously, when
first he had had a car, he had driven it over a drunken man and
killed him, and the man had been waiting for him ever since. The
Nawab Bahadur was innocent before God and the Law, he had paid
double the compensation necessary; but it was no use, the man
continued to wait in an unspeakable form, close to the scene of
his death. None of the English people knew of this, nor did the
chauffeur; it was a racial secret communicable more by blood than
speech. He spoke now in horror of the particular circumstances; he
had led others into danger, he had risked the lives of two innocent
and honoured guests. He repeated, “If I had been killed, what
matter? it must happen sometime; but they who trusted me——”

The company shuddered and invoked the mercy of God. Only Aziz held
aloof, because a personal experience restrained him: was it not by
despising ghosts that he had come to know Mrs. Moore? “You know,
Nureddin,” he whispered to the grandson—an effeminate youth whom
he seldom met, always liked, and invariably forgot—“you know, my
dear fellow, we Moslems simply must get rid of these superstitions,
or India will never advance. How long must I hear of the savage
pig upon the Marabar Road?” Nureddin looked down. Aziz continued:
“Your grandfather belongs to another generation, and I respect and
love the old gentleman, as you know. I say nothing against him,
only that it is wrong for us, because we are young. I want you to
promise me—Nureddin, are you listening?—not to believe in Evil
Spirits, and if I die (for my health grows very weak) to bring up
my three children to disbelieve in them too.” Nureddin smiled, and
a suitable answer rose to his pretty lips, but before he could make
it the car arrived, and his grandfather took him away.

The game of Patience up in the civil lines went on longer than
this. Mrs. Moore continued to murmur “Red ten on a black knave,”
Miss Quested to assist her, and to intersperse among the intricacies
of the play details about the hyena, the engagement, the Maharani
of Mudkul, the Bhattacharyas, and the day generally, whose rough
desiccated surface acquired as it receded a definite outline, as
India itself might, could it be viewed from the moon. Presently
the players went to bed, but not before other people had woken up
elsewhere, people whose emotions they could not share, and whose
existence they ignored. Never tranquil, never perfectly dark, the
night wore itself away, distinguished from other nights by two or
three blasts of wind, which seemed to fall perpendicularly out of
the sky and to bounce back into it, hard and compact, leaving no
freshness behind them: the hot weather was approaching.




  CHAPTER IX


Aziz fell ill as he foretold—slightly ill. Three days later he lay
abed in his bungalow, pretending to be very ill. It was a touch of
fever, which he would have neglected if there was anything important
at the hospital. Now and then he groaned and thought he should die,
but did not think so for long, and a very little diverted him. It
was Sunday, always an equivocal day in the East, and an excuse for
slacking. He could hear church bells as he drowsed, both from the
civil station and from the missionaries out beyond the slaughter
house—different bells and rung with different intent, for one set
was calling firmly to Anglo-India, and the other feebly to mankind.
He did not object to the first set; the other he ignored, knowing
their inefficiency. Old Mr. Graysford and young Mr. Sorley made
converts during a famine, because they distributed food; but when
times improved they were naturally left alone again, and though
surprised and aggrieved each time this happened, they never learnt
wisdom. “No Englishman understands us except Mr. Fielding,” he
thought; “but how shall I see him again? If he entered this room
the disgrace of it would kill me.” He called to Hassan to clear
up, but Hassan, who was testing his wages by ringing them on the
step of the verandah, found it possible not to hear him; heard and
didn’t hear, just as Aziz had called and hadn’t called. “That’s
India all over . . . how like us . . . there we are . . .” He dozed
again, and his thoughts wandered over the varied surface of life.

Gradually they steadied upon a certain spot—the Bottomless Pit
according to missionaries, but he had never regarded it as more
than a dimple. Yes, he did want to spend an evening with some
girls, singing and all that, the vague jollity that would culminate
in voluptuousness. Yes, that was what he did want. How could it be
managed? If Major Callendar had been an Indian, he would have
remembered what young men are, and granted two or three days’ leave
to Calcutta without asking questions. But the Major assumed either
that his subordinates were made of ice, or that they repaired to
the Chandrapore bazaars—disgusting ideas both. It was only Mr.
Fielding who——

“Hassan!”

The servant came running.

“Look at those flies, brother;” and he pointed to the horrible mass
that hung from the ceiling. The nucleus was a wire which had been
inserted as a homage to electricity. Electricity had paid no
attention, and a colony of eye-flies had come instead and blackened
the coils with their bodies.

“Huzoor, those are flies.”

“Good, good, they are, excellent, but why have I called you?”

“To drive them elsewhere,” said Hassan, after painful thought.

“Driven elsewhere, they always return.”

“Huzoor.”

“You must make some arrangement against flies; that is why you are
my servant,” said Aziz gently.

Hassan would call the little boy to borrow the step-ladder from
Mahmoud Ali’s house; he would order the cook to light the Primus
stove and heat water; he would personally ascend the steps with a
bucket in his arms, and dip the end of the coil into it.

“Good, very good. Now what have you to do?”

“Kill flies.”

“Good. Do it.”

Hassan withdrew, the plan almost lodged in his head, and began to
look for the little boy. Not finding him, his steps grew slower,
and he stole back to his post on the verandah, but did not go on
testing his rupees, in case his master heard them clink. On
twittered the Sunday bells; the East had returned to the East via
the suburbs of England, and had become ridiculous during the
detour.

Aziz continued to think about beautiful women.

His mind here was hard and direct, though not brutal. He had learnt
all he needed concerning his own constitution many years ago,
thanks to the social order into which he had been born, and when
he came to study medicine he was repelled by the pedantry and fuss
with which Europe tabulates the facts of sex. Science seemed to
discuss everything from the wrong end. It didn’t interpret his
experiences when he found them in a German manual, because by being
there they ceased to be his experiences. What he had been told by
his father or mother or had picked up from servants—it was
information of that sort that he found useful, and handed on as
occasion offered to others.

But he must not bring any disgrace on his children by some silly
escapade. Imagine if it got about that he was not respectable! His
professional position too must be considered, whatever Major
Callendar thought. Aziz upheld the proprieties, though he did not
invest them with any moral halo, and it was here that he chiefly
differed from an Englishman. His conventions were social. There is
no harm in deceiving society as long as she does not find you out,
because it is only when she finds you out that you have harmed her;
she is not like a friend or God, who are injured by the mere
existence of unfaithfulness. Quite clear about this, he meditated
what type of lie he should tell to get away to Calcutta, and had
thought of a man there who could be trusted to send him a wire and
a letter that he could show to Major Callendar, when the noise of
wheels was heard in his compound. Someone had called to enquire.
The thought of sympathy increased his fever, and with a sincere
groan he wrapped himself in his quilt.

“Aziz, my dear fellow, we are greatly concerned,” said Hamidullah’s
voice. One, two, three, four bumps, as people sat down upon his
bed.

“When a doctor falls ill it is a serious matter,” said the voice
of Mr. Syed Mohammed, the assistant engineer.

“When an engineer falls ill, it is equally important,” said the
voice of Mr. Haq, a police inspector.

“Oh yes, we are all jolly important, our salaries prove it.”

“Dr. Aziz took tea with our Principal last Thursday afternoon,”
piped Rafi, the engineer’s nephew. “Professor Godbole, who also
attended, has sickened too, which seems rather a curious thing,
sir, does it not?”

Flames of suspicion leapt up in the breast of each man.

“Humbug!” exclaimed Hamidullah, in authoritative tones, quenching
them.

“Humbug, most certainly,” echoed the others, ashamed of themselves.
The wicked schoolboy, having failed to start a scandal, lost
confidence and stood up with his back to the wall.

“Is Professor Godbole ill?” enquired Aziz, penetrated by the news.
“I am sincerely sorry.” Intelligent and compassionate, his face
peeped out of the bright crimson folds of the quilt. “How do you
do, Mr. Syed Mohammed, Mr. Haq? How very kind of you to enquire
after my health! How do you do, Hamidullah? But you bring me bad
news. What is wrong with him, the excellent fellow?”

“Why don’t you answer, Rafi? You’re the great authority,” said his
uncle.

“Yes, Rafi’s the great man,” said Hamidullah, rubbing it in. “Rafi
is the Sherlock Holmes of Chandrapore. Speak up, Rafi.”

Less than the dust, the schoolboy murmured the word “Diarrhœa,”
but took courage as soon as it had been uttered, for it improved
his position. Flames of suspicion shot up again in the breasts of
his elders, though in a different direction. Could what was called
diarrhœa really be an early case of cholera?

“If this is so, this is a very serious thing: this is scarcely the
end of March. Why have I not been informed?” cried Aziz.

“Dr. Panna Lal attends him, sir.”

“Oh yes, both Hindus; there we have it; they hang together like
flies and keep everything dark. Rafi, come here. Sit down. Tell me
all the details. Is there vomiting also?”

“Oh yes indeed, sir, and the serious pains.”

“That settles it. In twenty-four hours he will be dead.”

Everybody looked and felt shocked, but Professor Godbole had
diminished his appeal by linking himself with a co-religionist. He
moved them less than when he had appeared as a suffering individual.
Before long they began to condemn him as a source of infection.
“All illness proceeds from Hindus,” Mr. Haq said. Mr. Syed Mohammed
had visited religious fairs, at Allahabad and at Ujjain, and
described them with biting scorn. At Allahabad there was flowing
water, which carried impurities away, but at Ujjain the little
river Sipra was banked up, and thousands of bathers deposited their
germs in the pool. He spoke with disgust of the hot sun, the
cow-dung and marigold flowers, and the encampment of saddhus, some
of whom strode stark naked through the streets. Asked what was the
name of the chief idol at Ujjain, he replied that he did not know,
he had disdained to enquire, he really could not waste his time
over such trivialities. His outburst took some time, and in his
excitement he fell into Punjabi (he came from that side) and was
unintelligible.

Aziz liked to hear his religion praised. It soothed the surface of
his mind, and allowed beautiful images to form beneath. When the
engineer’s noisy tirade was finished, he said, “That is exactly my
own view.” He held up his hand, palm outward, his eyes began to
glow, his heart to fill with tenderness. Issuing still farther from
his quilt, he recited a poem by Ghalib. It had no connection with
anything that had gone before, but it came from his heart and spoke
to theirs. They were overwhelmed by its pathos; pathos, they
agreed, is the highest quality in art; a poem should touch the
hearer with a sense of his own weakness, and should institute some
comparison between mankind and flowers. The squalid bedroom grew
quiet; the silly intrigues, the gossip, the shallow discontent were
stilled, while words accepted as immortal filled the indifferent
air. Not as a call to battle, but as a calm assurance came the
feeling that India was one; Moslem; always had been; an assurance
that lasted until they looked out of the door. Whatever Ghalib had
felt, he had anyhow lived in India, and this consolidated it for
them: he had gone with his own tulips and roses, but tulips and
roses do not go. And the sister kingdoms of the north—Arabia,
Persia, Ferghana, Turkestan—stretched out their hands as he sang,
sadly, because all beauty is sad, and greeted ridiculous Chandrapore,
where every street and house was divided against itself, and told
her that she was a continent and a unity.

Of the company, only Hamidullah had any comprehension of poetry.
The minds of the others were inferior and rough. Yet they listened
with pleasure, because literature had not been divorced from their
civilization. The police inspector, for instance, did not feel that
Aziz had degraded himself by reciting, nor break into the cheery
guffaw with which an Englishman averts the infection of beauty. He
just sat with his mind empty, and when his thoughts, which were
mainly ignoble, flowed back into it they had a pleasant freshness.
The poem had done no “good” to anyone, but it was a passing
reminder, a breath from the divine lips of beauty, a nightingale
between two worlds of dust. Less explicit than the call to Krishna,
it voiced our loneliness nevertheless, our isolation, our need for
the Friend who never comes yet is not entirely disproved. Aziz it
left thinking about women again, but in a different way: less
definite, more intense. Sometimes poetry had this effect on him,
sometimes it only increased his local desires, and he never knew
beforehand which effect would ensue: he could discover no rule for
this or for anything else in life.

Hamidullah had called in on his way to a worrying committee of
notables, nationalist in tendency, where Hindus, Moslems, two
Sikhs, two Parsis, a Jain, and a Native Christian tried to like
one another more than came natural to them. As long as someone
abused the English, all went well, but nothing constructive had
been achieved, and if the English were to leave India, the committee
would vanish also. He was glad that Aziz, whom he loved and whose
family was connected with his own, took no interest in politics,
which ruin the character and career, yet nothing can be achieved
without them. He thought of Cambridge—sadly, as of another poem
that had ended. How happy he had been there, twenty years ago!
Politics had not mattered in Mr. and Mrs. Bannister’s rectory.
There, games, work, and pleasant society had interwoven, and
appeared to be sufficient substructure for a national life. Here
all was wire-pulling and fear. Messrs. Syed Mohammed and Haq—he
couldn’t even trust them, although they had come in his carriage,
and the schoolboy was a scorpion. Bending down, he said, “Aziz,
Aziz, my dear boy, we must be going, we are already late. Get well
quickly, for I do not know what our little circle would do without
you.”

“I shall not forget those affectionate words,” replied Aziz.

“Add mine to them,” said the engineer.

“Thank you, Mr. Syed Mohammed, I will.”

“And mine,” “And, sir, accept mine,” cried the others, stirred each
according to his capacity towards goodwill. Little ineffectual
unquenchable flames! The company continued to sit on the bed and
to chew sugarcane, which Hassan had run for into the bazaar, and
Aziz drank a cup of spiced milk. Presently there was the sound of
another carriage. Dr. Panna Lal had arrived, driven by horrid Mr.
Ram Chand. The atmosphere of a sick-room was at once re-established,
and the invalid retired under his quilt.

“Gentlemen, you will excuse, I have come to enquire by Major
Callendar’s orders,” said the Hindu, nervous of the den of fanatics
into which his curiosity had called him.

“Here he lies,” said Hamidullah, indicating the prostrate form.

“Dr. Aziz, Dr, Aziz, I come to enquire.”

Aziz presented an expressionless face to the thermometer.

“Your hand also, please.” He took it, gazed at the flies on the
ceiling, and finally announced “Some temperature.”

“I think not much,” said Ram Chand, desirous of fomenting trouble.

“Some; he should remain in bed,” repeated Dr. Panna Lal, and shook
the thermometer down, so that its altitude remained for ever
unknown. He loathed his young colleague since the disasters with
Dapple, and he would have liked to do him a bad turn and report to
Major Callendar that he was shamming. But he might want a day in
bed himself soon,—besides, though Major Callendar always believed
the worst of natives, he never believed them when they carried
tales about one another. Sympathy seemed the safer course. “How is
stomach?” he enquired, “how head?” And catching sight of the empty
cup, he recommended a milk diet.

“This is a great relief to us, it is very good of you to call,
Doctor Sahib,” Said Hamidullah, buttering him up a bit.

“It is only my duty.”

“We know how busy you are.”

“Yes, that is true.”

“And how much illness there is in the city.”

The doctor suspected a trap in this remark; if he admitted that
there was or was not illness, either statement might be used
against him. “There is always illness,” he replied, “and I am
always busy—it is a doctor’s nature.”

“He has not a minute, he is due double sharp at Government College
now,” said Ram Chand.

“You attend Professor Godbole there perhaps?”

The doctor looked professional and was silent.

“We hope his diarrhœa is ceasing.”

“He progresses, but not from diarrhœa.”

“We are in some anxiety over him—he and Dr. Aziz are great friends.
If you could tell us the name of his complaint we should be grateful
to you.”

After a cautious pause he said, “Hæmorrhoids.”

“And so much, my dear Rafi, for your cholera,” hooted Aziz, unable
to restrain himself.

“Cholera, cholera, what next, what now?” cried the doctor, greatly
fussed. “Who spreads such untrue reports about my patients?”

Hamidullah pointed to the culprit.

“I hear cholera, I hear bubonic plague, I hear every species of
lie. Where will it end, I ask myself sometimes. This city is full
of misstatements, and the originators of them ought to be discovered
and punished authoritatively.”

“Rafi, do you hear that? Now why do you stuff us up with all this
humbug?”

The schoolboy murmured that another boy had told him, also that
the bad English grammar the Government obliged them to use often
gave the wrong meaning for words, and so led scholars into mistakes.

“That is no reason you should bring a charge against a doctor,”
said Ram Chand.

“Exactly, exactly,” agreed Hamidullah, anxious to avoid an
unpleasantness. Quarrels spread so quickly and so far, and Messrs.
Syed Mohammed and Haq looked cross, and ready to fly out. “You must
apologize properly, Rafi, I can see your uncle wishes it,” he said.
“You have not yet said that you are sorry for the trouble you have
caused this gentleman by your carelessness.”

“It is only a boy,” said Dr. Panna Lal, appeased.

“Even boys must learn,” said Ram Chand.

“Your own son failing to pass the lowest standard, I think,” said
Syed Mohammed suddenly.

“Oh, indeed? Oh yes, perhaps. He has not the advantage of a relative
in the Prosperity Printing Press.”

“Nor you the advantage of conducting their cases in the Courts any
longer.”

Their voices rose. They attacked one another with obscure allusions
and had a silly quarrel. Hamidullah and the doctor tried to make
peace between them. In the midst of the din someone said, “I say!
Is he ill or isn’t he ill?” Mr. Fielding had entered unobserved.
All rose to their feet, and Hassan, to do an Englishman honour,
struck with a sugar-cane at the coil of flies.

Aziz said, “Sit down,” coldly. What a room! What a meeting! Squalor
and ugly talk, the floor strewn with fragments of cane and nuts,
and spotted with ink, the pictures crooked upon the dirty walls,
no punkah! He hadn’t meant to live like this or among these
third-rate people. And in his confusion he thought only of the
insignificant Rafi, whom he had laughed at, and allowed to be
teased. The boy must be sent away happy, or hospitality would have
failed, along the whole line.

“It is good of Mr. Fielding to condescend to visit our friend,”
said the police inspector. “We are touched by this great kindness.”

“Don’t talk to him like that, he doesn’t want it, and he doesn’t
want three chairs; he’s not three Englishmen,” he flashed. “Rafi,
come here. Sit down again. I’m delighted you could come with Mr.
Hamidullah, my dear boy; it will help me to recover, seeing you.”

“Forgive my mistakes,” said Rafi, to consolidate himself.

“Well, are you ill, Aziz, or aren’t you?” Fielding repeated.

“No doubt Major Callendar has told you that I am shamming.”

“Well, are you?” The company laughed, friendly and pleased. “An
Englishman at his best,” they thought; “so genial.”

“Enquire from Dr. Panna Lal.”

“You’re sure I don’t tire you by stopping?”

“Why, no! There are six people present in my small room already.
Please remain seated, if you will excuse the informality.” He
turned away and continued to address Rafi, who was terrified at
the arrival of his Principal, remembered that he had tried to
spread slander about him, and yearned to get away.

“He is ill and he is not ill,” said Hamidullah, offering a
cigarette. “And I suppose that most of us are in that same case.”

Fielding agreed; he and the pleasant sensitive barrister got on
well. They were fairly intimate and beginning to trust each other.

“The whole world looks to be dying, still it doesn’t die, so we
must assume the existence of a beneficent Providence.”

“Oh, that is true, how true!” said the policeman, thinking religion
had been praised.

“Does Mr. Fielding think it’s true?.”

“Think which true? The world isn’t dying. I’m certain of that!”

“No, no—the existence of Providence.”

“Well, I don’t believe in Providence.”

“But how then can you believe in God?” asked Syed Mohammed.

“I don’t believe in God.”

A tiny movement as of “I told you so!” passed round the company,
and Aziz looked up for an instant, scandalized. “Is it correct that
most are atheists in England now?” Hamidullah enquired.

“The educated thoughtful people? I should say so, though they don’t
like the name. The truth is that the West doesn’t bother much over
belief and disbelief in these days. Fifty years ago, or even when
you and I were young, much more fuss was made.”

“And does not morality also decline?”

“It depends what you call—yes, yes, I suppose morality does
decline.”

“Excuse the question, but if this is the case, how is England
justified in holding India?”

There they were! Politics again. “It’s a question I can’t get my
mind on to,” he replied. “I’m out here personally because I needed
a job. I cannot tell you why England is here or whether she ought
to be here. It’s beyond me.”

“Well-qualified Indians also need jobs in the educational.”

“I guess they do; I got in first,” said Fielding, smiling.

“Then excuse me again—is it fair an Englishman should occupy one
when Indians are available? Of course I mean nothing personally.
Personally we are delighted you should be here, and we benefit
greatly by this frank talk.”

There is only one answer to a conversation of this type: “England
holds India for her good.” Yet Fielding was disinclined to give
it. The zeal for honesty had eaten him up. He said, “I’m delighted
to be here too—that’s my answer, there’s my only excuse. I can’t
tell you anything about fairness. It mayn’t have been fair I should
have been born. I take up some other fellow’s air, don’t I, whenever
I breathe? Still, I’m glad it’s happened, and I’m glad I’m out
here. However big a badmash one is—if one’s happy in consequence,
that is some justification.”

The Indians were bewildered. The line of thought was not alien to
them, but the words were too definite and bleak. Unless a sentence
paid a few compliments to Justice and Morality in passing, its
grammar wounded their ears and paralysed their minds. What they
said and what they felt were (except in the case of affection)
seldom the same. They had numerous mental conventions and when
these were flouted they found it very difficult to function.
Hamidullah bore up best. “And those Englishmen who are not delighted
to be in India—have they no excuse?” he asked.

“None. Chuck ’em out.”

“It may be difficult to separate them from the rest,” he laughed.

“Worse than difficult, wrong,” said Mr. Ram Chand. “No Indian
gentleman approves chucking out as a proper thing. Here we differ
from those other nations. We are so spiritual.”

“Oh that is true, how true!” said the police inspector.

“Is it true, Mr. Haq? I don’t consider us spiritual. We can’t
co-ordinate, we can’t co-ordinate, it only comes to that. We can’t
keep engagements, we can’t catch trains. What more than this is
the so-called spirituality of India? You and I ought to be at the
Committee of Notables, we’re not; our friend Dr. Lal ought to be
with his patients, he isn’t. So we go on, and so we shall continue
to go, I think, until the end of time.”

“It is not the end of time, it is scarcely ten-thirty, ha, ha!”
cried Dr. Panna Lal, who was again in confident mood. “Gentlemen,
if I may be allowed to say a few words, what an interesting talk,
also thankfulness and gratitude to Mr. Fielding in the first place
teaches our sons and gives them all the great benefits of his
experience and judgment——”

“Dr. Lal!”

“Dr. Aziz?”

“You sit on my leg.”

“I beg pardon, but some might say your leg kicks.”

“Come along, we tire the invalid in either case,” said Fielding,
and they filed out—four Mohammedans, two Hindus and the Englishman.
They stood on the verandah while their conveyances were summoned
out of various patches of shade.

“Aziz has a high opinion of you, he only did not speak because of
his illness.”

“I quite understand,” said Fielding, who was rather disappointed
with his call. The Club comment, “making himself cheap as usual,”
passed through his mind. He couldn’t even get his horse brought
up. He had liked Aziz so much at their first meeting, and had hoped
for developments.




  CHAPTER X


The heat had leapt forward in the last hour, the street was deserted
as if a catastrophe had cleaned off humanity during the inconclusive
talk. Opposite Aziz’ bungalow stood a large unfinished house
belonging to two brothers, astrologers, and a squirrel hung
head-downwards on it, pressing its belly against burning scaffolding
and twitching a mangy tail. It seemed the only occupant of the
house, and the squeals it gave were in tune with the infinite, no
doubt, but not attractive except to other squirrels. More noises
came from a dusty tree, where brown birds creaked and floundered
about looking for insects; another bird, the invisible coppersmith,
had started his “ponk ponk.” It matters so little to the majority
of living beings what the minority, that calls itself human,
desires or decides. Most of the inhabitants of India do not mind
how India is governed. Nor are the lower animals of England
concerned about England, but in the tropics the indifference is
more prominent, the inarticulate world is closer at hand and
readier to resume control as soon as men are tired. When the seven
gentlemen who had held such various opinions inside the bungalow
came out of it, they were aware of a common burden, a vague threat
which they called “the bad weather coming.” They felt that they
could not do their work, or would not be paid enough for doing it.
The space between them and their carriages, instead of being empty,
was clogged with a medium that pressed against their flesh, the
carriage cushions scalded their trousers, their eyes pricked, domes
of hot water accumulated under their head-gear and poured down
their cheeks. Salaaming feebly, they dispersed for the interior of
other bungalows, to recover their self-esteem and the qualities
that distinguished them from each other.

All over the city and over much of India the same retreat on the
part of humanity was beginning, into cellars, up hills, under
trees. April, herald of horrors, is at hand. The sun was returning
to his kingdom with power but without beauty—that was the sinister
feature. If only there had been beauty! His cruelty would have been
tolerable then. Through excess of light, he failed to triumph, he
also; in his yellowy-white overflow not only matter, but brightness
itself lay drowned. He was not the unattainable friend, either of
men or birds or other suns, he was not the eternal promise, the
never-withdrawn suggestion that haunts our consciousness; he was
merely a creature, like the rest, and so debarred from glory.




  CHAPTER XI


Although the Indians had driven off, and Fielding could see his
horse standing in a small shed in the corner of the compound, no
one troubled to bring it to him. He started to get it himself, but
was stopped by a call from the house. Aziz was sitting up in bed,
looking dishevelled and sad. “Here’s your home,” he said
sardonically. “Here’s the celebrated hospitality of the East. Look
at the flies. Look at the chunam coming off the walls. Isn’t it
jolly? Now I suppose you want to be off, having seen an Oriental
interior.”

“Anyhow, you want to rest.”

“I can rest the whole day, thanks to worthy Dr. Lal. Major
Callendar’s spy, I suppose you know, but this time it didn’t work.
I am allowed to have a slight temperature.”

“Callendar doesn’t trust anyone, English or Indian: that’s his
character, and I wish you weren’t under him; but you are, and
that’s that.”

“Before you go, for you are evidently in a great hurry, will you
please unlock that drawer? Do you see a piece of brown paper at
the top?”

“Yes.”

“Open it.”

“Who is this?”

“She was my wife. You are the first Englishman she has ever come
before. Now put her photograph away.”

He was astonished, as a traveller who suddenly sees, between the
stones of the desert, flowers. The flowers have been there all the
time, but suddenly he sees them. He tried to look at the photograph,
but in itself it was just a woman in a sari, facing the world. He
muttered, “Really, I don’t know why you pay me this great
compliment, Aziz, but I do appreciate it.”

“Oh, it’s nothing, she was not a highly educated woman or even
beautiful, but put it away. You would have seen her, so why should
you not see her photograph?”

“You would have allowed me to see her?”

“Why not? I believe in the purdah, but I should have told her you
were my brother, and she would have seen you. Hamidullah saw her,
and several others.”

“Did she think they were your brothers?”

“Of course not, but the word exists and is convenient. All men are
my brothers, and as soon as one behaves as such he may see my
wife.”

“And when the whole world behaves as such, there will be no more
purdah?”

“It is because you can say and feel such a remark as that, that I
show you the photograph,” said Aziz gravely.

“It is beyond the power of most men. It is because you behave well
while I behave badly that I show it you. I never expected you to
come back just now when I called you. I thought, ‘He has certainly
done with me; I have insulted him.’ Mr. Fielding, no one can ever
realize how much kindness we Indians need, we do not even realize
it ourselves. But we know when it has been given. We do not forget,
though we may seem to. Kindness, more kindness, and even after that
more kindness. I assure you it is the only hope.” His voice seemed
to arise from a dream. Altering it, yet still deep below his normal
surface, he said, “We can’t build up India except on what we feel.
What is the use of all these reforms, and Conciliation Committees
for Mohurram, and shall we cut the tazia short or shall we carry
it another route, and Councils of Notables and official parties
where the English sneer at our skins?”

“It’s beginning at the wrong end, isn’t it? I know, but institutions
and the governments don’t.” He looked again at the photograph. The
lady faced the world at her husband’s wish and her own, but how
bewildering she found it, the echoing contradictory world!

“Put her away, she is of no importance, she is dead,” said Aziz
gently. “I showed her to you because I have nothing else to show.
You may look round the whole of my bungalow now, and empty
everything. I have no other secrets, my three children live away
with their grandmamma, and that is all.”

Fielding sat down by the bed, flattered at the trust reposed in
him, yet rather sad. He felt old. He wished that he too could be
carried away on waves of emotion. The next time they met, Aziz
might be cautious and standoffish. He realized this, and it made
him sad that he should realize it. Kindness, kindness, and more
kindness—yes, that he might supply, but was that really all that
the queer nation needed? Did it not also demand an occasional
intoxication of the blood? What had he done to deserve this outburst
of confidence, and what hostage could he give in exchange? He
looked back at his own life. What a poor crop of secrets it had
produced! There were things in it that he had shown to no one, but
they were so uninteresting, it wasn’t worth while lifting a purdah
on their account. He’d been in love, engaged to be married, lady
broke it off, memories of her and thoughts about her had kept him
from other women for a time; then indulgence, followed by repentance
and equilibrium. Meagre really except the equilibrium, and Aziz
didn’t want to have that confided to him—he would have called it
“everything ranged coldly on shelves.”

“I shall not really be intimate with this fellow,” Fielding thought,
and then “nor with anyone.” That was the corollary. And he had to
confess that he really didn’t mind, that he was content to help
people, and like them as long as they didn’t object, and if they
objected pass on serenely. Experience can do much, and all that he
had learnt in England and Europe was an assistance to him, and
helped him towards clarity, but clarity prevented him from
experiencing something else.

“How did you like the two ladies you met last Thursday?” he asked.

Aziz shook his head distastefully. The question reminded him of
his rash remark about the Marabar Caves.

“How do you like Englishwomen generally?”

“Hamidullah liked them in England. Here we never look at them. Oh
no, much too careful. Let’s talk of something else.”

“Hamidullah’s right: they are much nicer in England. There’s
something that doesn’t suit them out here.”

Aziz after another silence said, “Why are you not married?”

Fielding was pleased that he had asked. “Because I have more or
less come through without it,” he replied.

“I was thinking of telling you a little about myself some day if
I can make it interesting enough. The lady I liked wouldn’t marry
me—that is the main point, but that’s fifteen years ago and now
means nothing.”

“But you haven’t children.”

“None.”

“Excuse the following question: have you any illegitimate children?”

“No. I’d willingly tell you if I had.”

“Then your name will entirely die out.”

“It must.”

“Well.” He shook his head. “This indifference is what the Oriental
will never understand.”

“I don’t care for children.”

“Caring has nothing to do with it,” he said impatiently.

“I don’t feel their absence, I don’t want them weeping around my
death-bed and being polite about me afterwards, which I believe is
the general notion. I’d far rather leave a thought behind me than
a child. Other people can have children. No obligation, with
England getting so chock-a-block and overrunning India for jobs.”

“Why don’t you marry Miss Quested?”

“Good God! why, the girl’s a prig.”

“Prig, prig? Kindly explain. Isn’t that a bad word?”

“Oh, I don’t know her, but she struck me as one of the more pathetic
products of Western education. She depresses me.”

“But prig, Mr. Fielding? How’s that?”

“She goes on and on as if she’s at a lecture—trying ever so hard
to understand India and life, and occasionally taking a note.”

“I thought her so nice and sincere.”

“So she probably is,” said Fielding, ashamed of his roughness: any
suggestion that he should marry always does produce overstatements
on the part of the bachelor, and a mental breeze. “But I can’t
marry her if I wanted to, for she has just become engaged to the
City Magistrate.”

“Has she indeed? I am so glad!” he exclaimed with relief, for this
exempted him from the Marabar expedition: he would scarcely be
expected to entertain regular Anglo-Indians.

“It’s the old mother’s doing. She was afraid her dear boy would
choose for himself, so she brought out the girl on purpose, and
flung them together until it happened.”

“Mrs. Moore did not mention that to me among her plans.”

“I may have got it wrong—I’m out of club gossip. But anyhow they’re
engaged to be married.”

“Yes, you’re out of it, my poor chap,” he smiled. “No Miss Quested
for Mr. Fielding. However, she was not beautiful. She has
practically no breasts, if you come to think of it.”

He smiled too, but found a touch of bad taste in the reference to
a lady’s breasts.

“For the City Magistrate they shall be sufficient perhaps, and he
for her. For you I shall arrange a lady with breasts like mangoes.
. . .”

“No, you won’t.”

“I will not really, and besides your position makes it dangerous
for you.” His mind had slipped from matrimony to Calcutta. His face
grew grave. Fancy if he had persuaded the Principal to accompany
him there, and then got him into trouble! And abruptly he took up
a new attitude towards his friend, the attitude of the protector
who knows the dangers of India and is admonitory. “You can’t be
too careful in every way, Mr. Fielding; whatever you say or do in
this damned country there is always some envious fellow on the
look-out. You may be surprised to know that there were at least
three spies sitting here when you came to enquire. I was really a
good deal upset that you talked in that fashion about God. They
will certainly report it.”

“To whom?”

“That’s all very well, but you spoke against morality also, and
you said you had come to take other people’s jobs. All that was
very unwise. This is an awful place for scandal. Why, actually one
of your own pupils was listening.”

“Thanks for telling me that; yes, I must try and be more careful.
If I’m interested, I’m apt to forget myself. Still, it doesn’t do
real harm.”

“But speaking out may get you into trouble.”

“It’s often done so in the past.”

“There, listen to that! But the end of it might be that you lost
your job.”

“If I do, I do. I shall survive it. I travel light.”

“Travel light! You are a most extraordinary race,” said Aziz,
turning away as if he were going to sleep, and immediately turning
back again. “Is it your climate, or what?”

“Plenty of Indians travel light too—saddhus and such. It’s one of
the things I admire about your country. Any man can travel light
until he has a wife or children. That’s part of my case against
marriage. I’m a holy man minus the holiness. Hand that on to your
three spies, and tell them to put it in their pipes.”

Aziz was charmed and interested, and turned the new idea over in
his mind. So this was why Mr. Fielding and a few others were so
fearless! They had nothing to lose. But he himself was rooted in
society and Islam. He belonged to a tradition which bound him, and
he had brought children into the world, the society of the future.
Though he lived so vaguely in this flimsy bungalow, nevertheless
he was placed, placed.

“I can’t be sacked from my job, because my job’s Education. I
believe in teaching people to be individuals, and to understand
other individuals. It’s the only thing I do believe in. At
Government College, I mix it up with trigonometry, and so on. When
I’m a saddhu, I shall mix it up with something else.”

He concluded his manifesto, and both were silent. The eye-flies
became worse than ever and danced close up to their pupils, or
crawled into their ears. Fielding hit about wildly. The exercise
made him hot, and he got up to go.

“You might tell your servant to bring my horse. He doesn’t seem to
appreciate my Urdu.”

“I know. I gave him orders not to. Such are the tricks we play on
unfortunate Englishmen. Poor Mr. Fielding! But I will release you
now. Oh dear! With the exception of yourself and Hamidullah, I have
no one to talk to in this place. You like Hamidullah, don’t you?”

“Very much.”

“Do you promise to come at once to us when you are in trouble?”

“I never can be in trouble.”

“There goes a queer chap, I trust he won’t come to grief,” thought
Aziz, left alone. His period of admiration was over, and he reacted
towards patronage. It was difficult for him to remain in awe of
anyone who played with all his cards on the table. Fielding, he
discovered on closer acquaintance, was truly warm-hearted and
unconventional, but not what can be called wise. That frankness of
speech in the presence of Ram Chand, Rafi and Co. was dangerous
and inelegant. It served no useful end.

But they were friends, brothers. That part was settled, their
compact had been subscribed by the photograph, they trusted one
another, affection had triumphed for once in a way. He dropped off
to sleep amid the happier memories of the last two hours—poetry of
Ghalib, female grace, good old Hamidullah, good Fielding, his
honoured wife and dear boys. He passed into a region where these
joys had no enemies but bloomed harmoniously in an eternal garden,
or ran down watershoots of ribbed marble, or rose into domes
whereunder were inscribed, black against white, the ninety-nine
attributes of God.




  PART II: CAVES


  CHAPTER XII


The Ganges, though flowing from the foot of Vishnu and through
Siva’s hair, is not an ancient stream. Geology, looking further
than religion, knows of a time when neither the river nor the
Himalayas that nourished it existed, and an ocean flowed over the
holy places of Hindustan. The mountains rose, their debris silted
up the ocean, the gods took their seats on them and contrived the
river, and the India we call immemorial came into being. But India
is really far older. In the days of the prehistoric ocean the
southern part of the peninsula already existed, and the high places
of Dravidia have been land since land began, and have seen on the
one side the sinking of a continent that joined them to Africa,
and on the other the upheaval of the Himalayas from a sea. They
are older than anything in the world. No water has ever covered
them, and the sun who has watched them for countless æons may still
discern in their outlines forms that were his before our globe was
torn from his bosom. If flesh of the sun’s flesh is to be touched
anywhere, it is here, among the incredible antiquity of these
hills.

Yet even they are altering. As Himalayan India rose, this India,
the primal, has been depressed, and is slowly re-entering the curve
of the earth. It may be that in æons to come an ocean will flow
here too, and cover the sun-born rocks with slime. Meanwhile the
plain of the Ganges encroaches on them with something of the sea’s
action. They are sinking beneath the newer lands. Their main mass
is untouched, but at the edge their outposts have been cut off and
stand knee-deep, throat-deep, in the advancing soil. There is
something unspeakable in these outposts. They are like nothing else
in the world, and a glimpse of them makes the breath catch. They
rise abruptly, insanely, without the proportion that is kept by
the wildest hills elsewhere, they bear no relation to anything
dreamt or seen. To call them “uncanny” suggests ghosts, and they
are older than all spirit. Hinduism has scratched and plastered a
few rocks, but the shrines are unfrequented, as if pilgrims, who
generally seek the extraordinary, had here found too much of it.
Some saddhus did once settle in a cave, but they were smoked out,
and even Buddha, who must have passed this way down to the Bo Tree
of Gya, shunned a renunciation more complete than his own, and has
left no legend of struggle or victory in the Marabar.

The caves are readily described. A tunnel eight feet long, five
feet high, three feet wide, leads to a circular chamber about
twenty feet in diameter. This arrangement occurs again and again
throughout the group of hills, and this is all, this is a Marabar
Cave. Having seen one such cave, having seen two, having seen
three, four, fourteen, twenty-four, the visitor returns to
Chandrapore uncertain whether he has had an interesting experience
or a dull one or any experience at all. He finds it difficult to
discuss the caves, or to keep them apart in his mind, for the
pattern never varies, and no carving, not even a bees’-nest or a
bat distinguishes one from another. Nothing, nothing attaches to
them, and their reputation—for they have one—does not depend upon
human speech. It is as if the surrounding plain or the passing
birds have taken upon themselves to exclaim “extraordinary,” and
the word has taken root in the air, and been inhaled by mankind.

They are dark caves. Even when they open towards the sun, very
little light penetrates down the entrance tunnel into the circular
chamber. There is little to see, and no eye to see it, until the
visitor arrives for his five minutes, and strikes a match.
Immediately another flame rises in the depths of the rock and moves
towards the surface like an imprisoned spirit: the walls of the
circular chamber have been most marvellously polished. The two
flames approach and strive to unite, but cannot, because one of
them breathes air, the other stone. A mirror inlaid with lovely
colours divides the lovers, delicate stars of pink and grey
interpose, exquisite nebulæ, shadings fainter than the tail of a
comet or the midday moon, all the evanescent life of the granite,
only here visible. Fists and fingers thrust above the advancing
soil—here at last is their skin, finer than any covering acquired
by the animals, smoother than windless water, more voluptuous than
love. The radiance increases, the flames touch one another, kiss,
expire. The cave is dark again, like all the caves.

Only the wall of the circular chamber has been polished thus. The
sides of the tunnel are left rough, they impinge as an afterthought
upon the internal perfection. An entrance was necessary, so mankind
made one. But elsewhere, deeper in the granite, are there certain
chambers that have no entrances? Chambers never unsealed since the
arrival of the gods. Local report declares that these exceed in
number those that can be visited, as the dead exceed the living—four
hundred of them, four thousand or million. Nothing is inside them,
they were sealed up before the creation of pestilence or treasure;
if mankind grew curious and excavated, nothing, nothing would be
added to the sum of good or evil. One of them is rumoured within
the boulder that swings on the summit of the highest of the hills;
a bubble-shaped cave that has neither ceiling nor floor, and
mirrors its own darkness in every direction infinitely. If the
boulder falls and smashes, the cave will smash too—empty as an
Easter egg. The boulder because of its hollowness sways in the
wind, and even moves when a crow perches upon it: hence its name
and the name of its stupendous pedestal: the Kawa Dol.




  CHAPTER XIII


These hills look romantic in certain lights and at suitable
distances, and seen of an evening from the upper verandah of the
club they caused Miss Quested to say conversationally to Miss Derek
that she should like to have gone, that Dr. Aziz at Mr. Fielding’s
had said he would arrange something, and that Indians seem rather
forgetful. She was overheard by the servant who offered them
vermouths. This servant understood English. And he was not exactly
a spy, but he kept his ears open, and Mahmoud Ali did not exactly
bribe him, but did encourage him to come and squat with his own
servants, and would happen to stroll their way when he was there.
As the story travelled, it accreted emotion and Aziz learnt with
horror that the ladies were deeply offended with him, and had
expected an invitation daily. He thought his facile remark had been
forgotten. Endowed with two memories, a temporary and a permanent,
he had hitherto relegated the caves to the former. Now he
transferred them once for all, and pushed the matter through. They
were to be a stupendous replica of the tea party. He began by
securing Fielding and old Godbole, and then commissioned Fielding
to approach Mrs. Moore and Miss Quested when they were alone—by
this device Ronny, their official protector, could be circumvented.
Fielding didn’t like the job much; he was busy, caves bored him,
he foresaw friction and expense, but he would not refuse the first
favour his friend had asked from him, and did as required. The
ladies accepted. It was a little inconvenient in the present press
of their engagements, still, they hoped to manage it after
consulting Mr. Heaslop. Consulted, Ronny raised no objection,
provided Fielding undertook full responsibility for their comfort.
He was not enthusiastic about the picnic, but, then, no more were
the ladies—no one was enthusiastic, yet it took place.

Aziz was terribly worried. It was not a long expedition—a train
left Chandrapore just before dawn, another would bring them back
for tiffin—but he was only a little official still, and feared to
acquit himself dishonourably. He had to ask Major Callendar for
half a day’s leave, and be refused because of his recent malingering;
despair; renewed approach of Major Callendar through Fielding, and
contemptuous snarling permission. He had to borrow cutlery from
Mahmoud Ali without inviting him. Then there was the question of
alcohol; Mr. Fielding, and perhaps the ladies, were drinkers, so
must he provide whisky-sodas and ports? There was the problem of
transport from the wayside station of Marabar to the caves. There
was the problem of Professor Godbole and his food, and of Professor
Godbole and other people’s food—two problems, not one problem. The
Professor was not a very strict Hindu—he would take tea, fruit,
soda-water and sweets, whoever cooked them, and vegetables and rice
if cooked by a Brahman; but not meat, not cakes lest they contained
eggs, and he would not allow anyone else to eat beef: a slice of
beef upon a distant plate would wreck his happiness. Other people
might eat mutton, they might eat ham. But over ham Aziz’ own
religion raised its voice: he did not fancy other people eating
ham. Trouble after trouble encountered him, because he had
challenged the spirit of the Indian earth, which tries to keep men
in compartments.

At last the moment arrived.

His friends thought him most unwise to mix himself up with English
ladies, and warned him to take every precaution against
unpunctuality. Consequently he spent the previous night at the
station. The servants were huddled on the platform, enjoined not
to stray. He himself walked up and down with old Mohammed Latif,
who was to act as major-domo. He felt insecure and also unreal. A
car drove up, and he hoped Fielding would get out of it, to lend
him solidity. But it contained Mrs. Moore, Miss Quested, and their
Goanese servant. He rushed to meet them, suddenly happy. “But
you’ve come, after all. Oh how very very kind of you!” he cried.
“This is the happiest moment in all my life.”

The ladies were civil. It was not the happiest moment in their
lives, still, they looked forward to enjoying themselves as soon
as the bother of the early start was over. They had not seen him
since the expedition was arranged, and they thanked him adequately.

“You don’t require tickets—please stop your servant. There are no
tickets on the Marabar branch line; it is its peculiarity. You come
to the carriage and rest till Mr. Fielding joins us. Did you know
you are to travel purdah? Will you like that?”

They replied that they should like it. The train had come in, and
a crowd of dependents were swarming over the seats of the carriage
like monkeys. Aziz had borrowed servants from his friends, as well
as bringing his own three, and quarrels over precedence were
resulting. The ladies’ servant stood apart, with a sneering
expression on his face. They had hired him while they were still
globe-trotters, at Bombay. In a hotel or among smart people he was
excellent, but as soon as they consorted with anyone whom he
thought second-rate he left them to their disgrace.

The night was still dark, but had acquired the temporary look that
indicates its end. Perched on the roof of a shed, the station-master’s
hens began to dream of kites instead of owls. Lamps were put out,
in order to save the trouble of putting them out later; the smell
of tobacco and the sound of spitting arose from third-class
passengers in dark corners; heads were unshrouded, teeth cleaned
on the twigs of a tree. So convinced was a junior official that
another sun would rise, that he rang a bell with enthusiasm. This
upset the servants. They shrieked that the train was starting, and
ran to both ends of it to intercede. Much had still to enter the
purdah carriage—a box bound with brass, a melon wearing a fez, a
towel containing guavas, a step-ladder and a gun. The guests played
up all right. They had no race-consciousness—Mrs. Moore was too
old, Miss Quested too new—and they behaved to Aziz as to any young
man who had been kind to them in the country. This moved him
deeply. He had expected them to arrive with Mr. Fielding, instead
of which they trusted themselves to be with him a few moments
alone.

“Send back your servant,” he suggested. “He is unnecessary. Then
we shall all be Moslems together.”

“And he is such a horrible servant. Antony, you can go; we don’t
want you,” said the girl impatiently.

“Master told me to come.”

“Mistress tells you to go.”

“Master says, keep near the ladies all the morning.”

“Well, your ladies won’t have you.” She turned to the host. “Do
get rid of him, Dr. Aziz!”

“Mohammed Latif!” he called.

The poor relative exchanged fezzes with the melon, and peeped out
of the window of the railway carriage, whose confusion he was
superintending.

“Here is my cousin, Mr. Mohammed Latif. Oh no, don’t shake hands.
He is an Indian of the old-fashioned sort, he prefers to salaam.
There, I told you so. Mohammed Latif, how beautifully you salaam.
See, he hasn’t understood; he knows no English.”

“You spick lie,” said the old man gently.

“I spick a lie! Oh, jolly good. Isn’t he a funny old man? We will
have great jokes with him later. He does all sorts of little
things. He is not nearly as stupid as you think, and awfully poor.
It’s lucky ours is a large family.” He flung an arm round the
grubby neck. “But you get inside, make yourselves at home; yes,
you lie down.” The celebrated Oriental confusion appeared at last
to be at an end. “Excuse me, now I must meet our other two guests!”

He was getting nervous again, for it was ten minutes to the time.
Still, Fielding was an Englishman, and they never do miss trains,
and Godbole was a Hindu and did not count, and, soothed by this
logic, he grew calmer as the hour of departure approached. Mohammed
Latif had bribed Antony not to come. They walked up and down the
platform, talking usefully. They agreed that they had overdone the
servants, and must leave two or three behind at Marabar station.
And Aziz explained that he might be playing one or two practical
jokes at the caves—not out of unkindness, but to make the guests
laugh. The old man assented with slight sideway motions of the
head: he was always willing to be ridiculed, and he bade Aziz not
spare him. Elated by his importance, he began an indecent anecdote.

“Tell me another time, brother, when I have more leisure, for now,
as I have already explained, we have to give pleasure to non-Moslems.
Three will be Europeans, one a Hindu, which must not be forgotten.
Every attention must be paid to Professor Godbole, lest he feel
that he is inferior to my other guests.”

“I will discuss philosophy with him.”

“That will be kind of you; but the servants are even more important.
We must not convey an impression of disorganization. It can be
done, and I expect you to do it . . .”

A shriek from the purdah carriage. The train had started.

“Merciful God!” cried Mohammed Latif. He flung himself at the
train, and leapt on to the footboard of a carriage. Aziz did
likewise. It was an easy feat, for a branch-line train is slow to
assume special airs. “We’re monkeys, don’t worry,” he called,
hanging on to a bar and laughing. Then he howled, “Mr. Fielding!
Mr. Fielding!”

There were Fielding and old Godbole, held up at the level-crossing.
Appalling catastrophe! The gates had been closed earlier than
usual. They leapt from their tonga; they gesticulated, but what
was the good. So near and yet so far! As the train joggled past
over the points, there was time for agonized words.

“Bad, bad, you have destroyed me.”

“Godbole’s pujah did it,” cried the Englishman.

The Brahman lowered his eyes, ashamed of religion. For it was so:
he had miscalculated the length of a prayer.

“Jump on, I must have you,” screamed Aziz, beside himself.

“Right, give a hand.”

“He’s not to, he’ll kill himself,” Mrs. Moore protested. He jumped,
he failed, missed his friend’s hand, and fell back on to the line.
The train rumbled past. He scrambled on to his feet, and bawled
after them, “I’m all right, you’re all right, don’t worry,” and
then they passed beyond range of his voice.

“Mrs. Moore, Miss Quested, our expedition is a ruin.” He swung
himself along the footboard, almost in tears.

“Get in, get in; you’ll kill yourself as well as Mr. Fielding. I
see no ruin.”

“How is that? Oh, explain to me!” he said piteously, like a child.

“We shall be all Moslems together now, as you promised.”

She was perfect as always, his dear Mrs. Moore. All the love for
her he had felt at the mosque welled up again, the fresher for
forgetfulness. There was nothing he would not do for her. He would
die to make her happy.

“Get in, Dr. Aziz, you make us giddy,” the other lady called. “If
they’re so foolish as to miss the train, that’s their loss, not
ours.”

“I am to blame. I am the host.”

“Nonsense, go to your carriage. We’re going to have a delightful
time without them.”

Not perfect like Mrs. Moore, but very sincere and kind. Wonderful
ladies, both of them, and for one precious morning his guests. He
felt important and competent. Fielding was a loss personally, being
a friend, increasingly dear, yet if Fielding had come, he himself
would have remained in leading-strings. “Indians are incapable of
responsibility,” said the officials, and Hamidullah sometimes said
so too. He would show those pessimists that they were wrong.
Smiling proudly, he glanced outward at the country, which was still
invisible except as a dark movement in the darkness; then upwards
at the sky, where the stars of the sprawling Scorpion had begun to
pale. Then he dived through a window into a second-class carriage.

“Mohammed Latif, by the way, what is in these caves, brother? Why
are we all going to see them?”

Such a question was beyond the poor relative’s scope. He could only
reply that God and the local villagers knew, and that the latter
would gladly act as guides.




  CHAPTER XIV


Most of life is so dull that there is nothing to be said about it,
and the books and talk that would describe it as interesting are
obliged to exaggerate, in the hope of justifying their own
existence. Inside its cocoon of work or social obligation, the
human spirit slumbers for the most part, registering the distinction
between pleasure and pain, but not nearly as alert as we pretend.
There are periods in the most thrilling day during which nothing
happens, and though we continue to exclaim, “I do enjoy myself,”
or, “I am horrified,” we are insincere. “As far as I feel anything,
it is enjoyment, horror”—it’s no more than that really, and a
perfectly adjusted organism would be silent.

It so happened that Mrs. Moore and Miss Quested had felt nothing
acutely for a fortnight. Ever since Professor Godbole had sung his
queer little song, they had lived more or less inside cocoons, and
the difference between them was that the elder lady accepted her
own apathy, while the younger resented hers. It was Adela’s faith
that the whole stream of events is important and interesting, and
if she grew bored she blamed herself severely and compelled her
lips to utter enthusiasms. This was the only insincerity in a
character otherwise sincere, and it was indeed the intellectual
protest of her youth. She was particularly vexed now because she
was both in India and engaged to be married, which double event
should have made every instant sublime.

India was certainly dim this morning, though seen under the auspices
of Indians. Her wish had been granted, but too late. She could not
get excited over Aziz and his arrangements. She was not the least
unhappy or depressed, and the various odd objects that surrounded
her—the comic “purdah” carriage, the piles of rugs and bolsters,
the rolling melons, the scent of sweet oils, the ladder, the
brass-bound box, the sudden irruption of Mahmoud Ali’s butler from
the lavatory with tea and poached eggs upon a tray—they were all
new and amusing, and led her to comment appropriately, but they
wouldn’t bite into her mind. So she tried to find comfort by
reflecting that her main interest would henceforward be Ronny.

“What a nice cheerful servant! What a relief after Antony!”

“They startle one rather. A strange place to make tea in,” said
Mrs. Moore, who had hoped for a nap.

“I want to sack Antony. His behaviour on the platform has decided
me.”

Mrs. Moore thought that Antony’s better self would come to the
front at Simla. Miss Quested was to be married at Simla; some
cousins, with a house looking straight on to Thibet, had invited
her.

“Anyhow, we must get a second servant, because at Simla you will
be at the hotel, and I don’t think Ronny’s Baldeo . . .” She loved
plans.

“Very well, you get another servant, and I’ll keep Antony with me.
I am used to his unappetizing ways. He will see me through the Hot
Weather.”

“I don’t believe in the Hot Weather. People like Major Callendar
who always talk about it—it’s in the hope of making one feel
inexperienced and small, like their everlasting, ‘I’ve been twenty
years in this country.’”

“I believe in the Hot Weather, but never did I suppose it would
bottle me up as it will.” For owing to the sage leisureliness of
Ronny and Adela, they could not be married till May, and consequently
Mrs. Moore could not return to England immediately after the
wedding, which was what she had hoped to do. By May a barrier of
fire would have fallen across India and the adjoining sea, and she
would have to remain perched up in the Himalayas waiting for the
world to get cooler.

“I won’t be bottled up,” announced the girl. “I’ve no patience with
these women here who leave their husbands grilling in the plains.
Mrs. McBryde hasn’t stopped down once since she married; she leaves
her quite intelligent husband alone half the year, and then’s
surprised she’s out of touch with him.”

“She has children, you see.”

“Oh yes, that’s true,” said Miss Quested, disconcerted.

“It is the children who are the first consideration. Until they
are grown up, and married off. When that happens one has again the
right to live for oneself—in the plains or the hills, as suits.”

“Oh yes, you’re perfectly right. I never thought it out.”

“If one has not become too stupid and old.” She handed her empty
cup to the servant.

“My idea now is that my cousins shall find me a servant in Simla,
at all events to see me through the wedding, after which Ronny
means to reorganize his staff entirely. He does it very well for
a bachelor; still, when he is married no doubt various changes will
have to be made—his old servants won’t want to take their orders
from me, and I don’t blame them.”

Mrs. Moore pushed up the shutters and looked out. She had brought
Ronny and Adela together by their mutual wish, but really she could
not advise them further. She felt increasingly (vision or
nightmare?) that, though people are important, the relations
between them are not, and that in particular too much fuss has been
made over marriage; centuries of carnal embracement, yet man is no
nearer to understanding man. And to-day she felt this with such
force that it seemed itself a relationship, itself a person who
was trying to take hold of her hand.

“Anything to be seen of the hills?”

“Only various shades of the dark.”

“We can’t be far from the place where my hyena was.” She peered
into the timeless twilight. The train crossed a nullah. “Pomper,
pomper, pomper,” was the sound that the wheels made as they trundled
over the bridge, moving very slowly. A hundred yards on came a
second nullah, then a third, suggesting the neighbourhood of higher
ground. “Perhaps this is mine; anyhow, the road runs parallel with
the railway.” Her accident was a pleasant memory; she felt in her
dry, honest way that it had given her a good shake up, and taught
her Ronny’s true worth. Then she went back to her plans; plans had
been a passion with her from girlhood. Now and then she paid
tribute to the present, said how friendly and intelligent Aziz was,
ate a guava, couldn’t eat a fried sweet, practised her Urdu on the
servant; but her thoughts ever veered to the manageable future,
and to the Anglo-Indian life she had decided to endure. And as she
appraised it with its adjuncts of Turtons and Burtons, the train
accompanied her sentences, “pomper, pomper,” the train half asleep,
going nowhere in particular and with no passenger of importance in
any of its carriages, the branch-line train, lost on a low
embankment between dull fields. Its message—for it had one—avoided
her well-equipped mind. Far away behind her, with a shriek that
meant business, rushed the Mail, connecting up important towns such
as Calcutta and Lahore, where interesting events occur and
personalities are developed. She understood that. Unfortunately,
India has few important towns. India is the country, fields,
fields, then hills, jungle, hills, and more fields. The branch line
stops, the road is only practicable for cars to a point, the
bullock-carts lumber down the side tracks, paths fray out into the
cultivation, and disappear near a splash of red paint. How can the
mind take hold of such a country? Generations of invaders have
tried, but they remain in exile. The important towns they build
are only retreats, their quarrels the malaise of men who cannot
find their way home. India knows of their trouble. She knows of
the whole world’s trouble, to its uttermost depth. She calls “Come”
through her hundred mouths, through objects ridiculous and august.
But come to what? She has never defined. She is not a promise, only
an appeal.

“I will fetch you from Simla when it’s cool enough. I will unbottle
you in fact,” continued the reliable girl. “We then see some of
the Mogul stuff—how appalling if we let you miss the Taj!—and then
I will see you off at Bombay. Your last glimpse of this country
really shall be interesting.” But Mrs. Moore had fallen asleep,
exhausted by the early start. She was in rather low health, and
ought not to have attempted the expedition, but had pulled herself
together in case the pleasure of the others should suffer. Her
dreams were of the same texture, but there it was her other children
who were wanting something, Stella and Ralph, and she was explaining
to them that she could not be in two families at once. When she
awoke, Adela had ceased to plan, and leant out of a window, saying,
“They’re rather wonderful.”

Astonishing even from the rise of the civil station, here the
Marabar were gods to whom earth is a ghost. Kawa Dol was nearest.
It shot up in a single slab, on whose summit one rock was poised—if
a mass so great can be called one rock. Behind it, recumbent, were
the hills that contained the other caves, isolated each from his
neighbour by broad channels of the plain. The assemblage, ten in
all, shifted a little as the train crept past them, as if observing
its arrival.

“I’ld not have missed this for anything,” said the girl, exaggerating
her enthusiasm. “Look, the sun’s rising—this’ll be absolutely
magnificent—come quickly—look. I wouldn’t have missed this for
anything. We should never have seen it if we’d stuck to the Turtons
and their eternal elephants.”

As she spoke, the sky to the left turned angry orange. Colour
throbbed and mounted behind a pattern of trees, grew in intensity,
was yet brighter, incredibly brighter, strained from without
against the globe of the air. They awaited the miracle. But at the
supreme moment, when night should have died and day lived, nothing
occurred. It was as if virtue had failed in the celestial fount.
The hues in the east decayed, the hills seemed dimmer though in
fact better lit, and a profound disappointment entered with the
morning breeze. Why, when the chamber was prepared, did the
bridegroom not enter with trumpets and shawms, as humanity expects?
The sun rose without splendour. He was presently observed trailing
yellowish behind the trees, or against insipid sky, and touching
the bodies already at work in the fields.

“Ah, that must be the false dawn—isn’t it caused by dust in the
upper layers of the atmosphere that couldn’t fall down during the
night? I think Mr. McBryde said so. Well, I must admit that England
has it as regards sunrises. Do you remember Grasmere?”

“Ah, dearest Grasmere!” Its little lakes and mountains were beloved
by them all. Romantic yet manageable, it sprang from a kindlier
planet. Here an untidy plain stretched to the knees of the Marabar.

“Good morning, good morning, put on your topis,” shouted Aziz from
farther down the train. “Put on your topis at once, the early sun
is highly dangerous for heads. I speak as a doctor.”

“Good morning, good morning, put on your own.”

“Not for my thick head,” he laughed, banging it and holding up pads
of his hair.

“Nice creature he is,” murmured Adela.

“Listen—Mohammed Latif says ‘Good morning’ next.” Various pointless
jests.

“Dr. Aziz, what’s happened to your hills? The train has forgotten
to stop.”

“Perhaps it is a circular train and goes back to Chandrapore
without a break. Who knows!”

Having wandered off into the plain for a mile, the train slowed up
against an elephant. There was a platform too, but it shrivelled
into insignificance. An elephant, waving her painted forehead at
the morn! “Oh, what a surprise!” called the ladies politely. Aziz
said nothing, but he nearly burst with pride and relief. The
elephant was the one grand feature of the picnic, and God alone
knew what he had gone through to obtain her. Semi-official, she
was best approached through the Nawab Bahadur, who was best
approached through Nureddin, but he never answered letters, but
his mother had great influence with him and was a friend of
Hamidullah Begum’s, who had been excessively kind and had promised
to call on her provided the broken shutter of the purdah carriage
came back soon enough from Calcutta. That an elephant should depend
from so long and so slender a string filled Aziz with content, and
with humorous appreciation of the East, where the friends of
friends are a reality, where everything gets done sometime, and
sooner or later every one gets his share of happiness. And Mohammed
Latif was likewise content, because two of the guests had missed
the train, and consequently he could ride on the howdah instead of
following in a cart, and the servants were content because an
elephant increased their self-esteem, and they tumbled out the
luggage into the dust with shouts and bangs, issuing orders to one
another, and convulsed with goodwill.

“It takes an hour to get there, an hour to get back, and two hours
for the caves, which we will call three,” said Aziz, smiling
charmingly. There was suddenly something regal about him. “The
train back is at eleven-thirty, and you will be sitting down to
your tiffin in Chandrapore with Mr. Heaslop at exactly your usual
hour, namely, one-fifteen. I know everything about you. Four
hours—quite a small expedition—and an hour extra for misfortunes,
which occur somewhat frequently among my people. My idea is to plan
everything without consulting you; but you, Mrs. Moore, or Miss
Quested, you are at any moment to make alterations if you wish,
even if it means giving up the caves. Do you agree? Then mount this
wild animal.”

The elephant had knelt, grey and isolated, like another hill. They
climbed up the ladder, and he mounted shikar fashion, treading
first on the sharp edge of the heel and then into the looped-up
tail. When Mohammed Latif followed him, the servant who held the
end of the tail let go of it according to previous instructions,
so that the poor relative slipped and had to cling to the netting
over the buttocks. It was a little piece of Court buffoonery, and
distressed only the ladies, whom it was intended to divert. Both
of them disliked practical jokes. Then the beast rose in two
shattering movements, and poised them ten feet above the plain.
Immediately below was the scurf of life that an elephant always
collects round its feet—villagers, naked babies. The servants flung
crockery into tongas. Hassan annexed the stallion intended for
Aziz, and defied Mahmoud Ali’s man from its altitude. The Brahman
who had been hired to cook for Professor Godbole was planted under
an acacia tree, to await their return. The train, also hoping to
return, wobbled away through the fields, turning its head this way
and that like a centipede. And the only other movement to be seen
was a movement as of antennae, really the counterpoises of the
wells which rose and fell on their pivots of mud all over the plain
and dispersed a feeble flow of water. The scene was agreeable
rather than not in the mild morning air, but there was little
colour in it, and no vitality.

As the elephant moved towards the hills (the pale sun had by this
time saluted them to the base, and pencilled shadows down their
creases) a new quality occurred, a spiritual silence which invaded
more senses than the ear. Life went on as usual, but had no
consequences, that is to say, sounds did not echo or thoughts
develop. Everything seemed cut off at its root, and therefore
infected with illusion. For instance, there were some mounds by
the edge of the track, low, serrated, and touched with whitewash.
What were these mounds—graves, breasts of the goddess Parvati? The
villagers beneath gave both replies. Again, there was a confusion
about a snake which was never cleared up. Miss Quested saw a thin,
dark object reared on end at the farther side of a watercourse,
and said, “A snake!” The villagers agreed, and Aziz explained: yes,
a black cobra, very venomous, who had reared himself up to watch
the passing of the elephant, But when she looked through Ronny’s
field-glasses, she found it wasn’t a snake, but the withered and
twisted stump of a toddy-palm. So she said, “It isn’t a snake.”
The villagers contradicted her. She had put the word into their
minds, and they refused to abandon it. Aziz admitted that it looked
like a tree through the glasses, but insisted that it was a black
cobra really, and improvised some rubbish about protective mimicry.
Nothing was explained, and yet there was no romance. Films of heat,
radiated from the Kawa Dol precipices, increased the confusion.
They came at irregular intervals and moved capriciously. A patch
of field would jump as if it was being fried, and then lie quiet.
As they drew closer the radiation stopped.

The elephant walked straight at the Kawa Dol as if she would knock
for admission with her forehead, then swerved, and followed a path
round its base. The stones plunged straight into the earth, like
cliffs into the sea, and while Miss Quested was remarking on this,
and saying that it was striking, the plain quietly disappeared,
peeled off, so to speak, and nothing was to be seen on either side
but the granite, very dead and quiet. The sky dominated as usual,
but seemed unhealthily near, adhering like a ceiling to the summits
of the precipices. It was as if the contents of the corridor had
never been changed. Occupied by his own munificence, Aziz noticed
nothing. His guests noticed a little. They did not feel that it
was an attractive place or quite worth visiting, and wished it
could have turned into some Mohammedan object, such as a mosque,
which their host would have appreciated and explained. His ignorance
became evident, and was really rather a drawback. In spite of his
gay, confident talk, he had no notion how to treat this particular
aspect of India; he was lost in it without Professor Godbole, like
themselves.

The corridor narrowed, then widened into a sort of tray. Here, more
or less, was their goal. A ruined tank held a little water which
would do for the animals, and close above the mud was punched a
black hole—the first of the caves. Three hills encircled the tray.
Two of them pumped out heat busily, but the third was in shadow,
and here they camped.

“A horrid, stuffy place really,” murmured Mrs. Moore to herself.

“How quick your servants are!” Miss Quested exclaimed. For a cloth
had already been laid, with a vase of artificial flowers in its
centre, and Mahmoud Ali’s butler offered them poached eggs and tea
for the second time.

“I thought we would eat this before our caves, and breakfast
after.”

“Isn’t this breakfast?”

“This breakfast? Did you think I should treat you so strangely?”
He had been warned that English people never stop eating, and that
he had better nourish them every two hours until a solid meal was
ready.

“How very well it is all arranged.”

“That you shall tell me when I return to Chandrapore. Whatever
disgraces I bring upon myself, you remain my guests.” He spoke
gravely now. They were dependent on him for a few hours, and he
felt grateful to them for placing themselves in such a position.
All was well so far; the elephant held a fresh cut bough to her
lips, the tonga shafts stuck up into the air, the kitchen-boy
peeled potatoes, Hassan shouted, and Mohammed Latif stood as he
ought, with a peeled switch in his hand. The expedition was a
success, and it was Indian; an obscure young man had been allowed
to show courtesy to visitors from another country, which is what
all Indians long to do—even cynics like Mahmoud Ali—but they never
have the chance. Hospitality had been achieved, they were “his”
guests; his honour was involved in their happiness, and any
discomfort they endured would tear his own soul.

Like most Orientals, Aziz overrated hospitality, mistaking it for
intimacy, and not seeing that it is tainted with the sense of
possession. It was only when Mrs. Moore or Fielding was near him
that he saw further, and knew that it is more blessed to receive
than to give. These two had strange and beautiful effects on
him—they were his friends, his for ever, and he theirs for ever;
he loved them so much that giving and receiving became one. He
loved them even better than the Hamidullahs, because he had
surmounted obstacles to meet them, and this stimulates a generous
mind. Their images remained somewhere in his soul up to his dying
day, permanent additions. He looked at her now as she sat on a
deck-chair, sipping his tea, and had for a moment a joy that held
the seeds of its own decay, for it would lead him to think, “Oh,
what more can I do for her?” and so back to the dull round of
hospitality. The black bullets of his eyes filled with soft
expressive light, and he said, “Do you ever remember our mosque,
Mrs. Moore?”

“I do. I do,” she said, suddenly vital and young.

“And how rough and rude I was, and how good you were.”

“And how happy we both were.”

“Friendships last longest that begin like that, I think. Shall I
ever entertain your other children?”

“Do you know about the others? She will never talk about them to
me,” said Miss Quested, unintentionally breaking a spell.

“Ralph and Stella, yes, I know everything about them. But we must
not forget to visit our caves. One of the dreams of my life is
accomplished in having you both here as my guests. You cannot
imagine how you have honoured me. I feel like the Emperor Babur.”

“Why like him?” she enquired, rising.

“Because my ancestors came down with him from Afghanistan. They
joined him at Herat. He also had often no more elephants than one,
none sometimes, but he never ceased showing hospitality. When he
fought or hunted or ran away, he would always stop for a time among
hills, just like us; he would never let go of hospitality and
pleasure, and if there was only a little food, he would have it
arranged nicely, and if only one musical instrument, he would
compel it to play a beautiful tune. I take him as my ideal. He is
the poor gentleman, and he became a great king.”

“I thought another Emperor is your favourite—I forget the name—you
mentioned him at Mr. Fielding’s: what my book calls Aurangzebe.”

“Alamgir? Oh yes, he was of course the more pious. But Babur—never
in his whole life did he betray a friend, so I can only think of
him this morning. And you know how he died? He laid down his life
for his son. A death far more difficult than battle. They were
caught in the heat. They should have gone back to Kabul for the
bad weather, but could not for reasons of state, and at Agra
Humayun fell sick. Babur walked round the bed three times, and
said, ‘I have borne it away,’ and he did bear it away; the fever
left his son and came to him instead, and he died. That is why I
prefer Babur to Alamgir. I ought not to do so, but I do. However,
I mustn’t delay you. I see you are ready to start.”

“Not at all,” she said, sitting down by Mrs. Moore again. “We enjoy
talk like this very much.” For at last he was talking about what
he knew and felt, talking as he had in Fielding’s garden-house; he
was again the Oriental guide whom they appreciated.

“I always enjoy conversing about the Moguls. It is the chief
pleasure I know. You see, those first six emperors were all most
wonderful men, and as soon as one of them is mentioned, no matter
which, I forget everything else in the world except the other five.
You could not find six such kings in all the countries of the
earth, not, I mean, coming one after the other—father, son.”

“Tell us something about Akbar.”

“Ah, you have heard the name of Akbar. Good. Hamidullah—whom you
shall meet—will tell you that Akbar is the greatest of all. I say,
‘Yes, Akbar is very wonderful, but half a Hindu; he was not a true
Moslem, which makes Hamidullah cry, ‘No more was Babur, he drank
wine.’ But Babur always repented afterwards, which makes the entire
difference, and Akbar never repented of the new religion he invented
instead of the Holy Koran.”

“But wasn’t Akbar’s new religion very fine? It was to embrace the
whole of India.”

“Miss Quested, fine but foolish. You keep your religion, I mine.
That is the best. Nothing embraces the whole of India, nothing,
nothing, and that was Akbar’s mistake.”

“Oh, do you feel that, Dr. Aziz?” she said thoughtfully. “I hope
you’re not right. There will have to be something universal in this
country—I don’t say religion, for I’m not religious, but something,
or how else are barriers to be broken down?”

She was only recommending the universal brotherhood he sometimes
dreamed of, but as soon as it was put into prose it became untrue.

“Take my own case,” she continued—it was indeed her own case that
had animated her. “I don’t know whether you happen to have heard,
but I’m going to marry Mr. Heaslop.”

“On which my heartiest congratulations.”

“Mrs. Moore, may I put our difficulty to Dr. Aziz—I mean our
Anglo-Indian one?”

“It is your difficulty, not mine, my dear.”

“Ah, that’s true. Well, by marrying Mr. Heaslop, I shall become
what is known as an Anglo-Indian.”

He held up his hand in protest. “Impossible. Take back such a
terrible remark.”

“But I shall; it’s inevitable. I can’t avoid the label. What I do
hope to avoid is the mentality. Women like——” She stopped, not
quite liking to mention names; she would boldly have said “Mrs.
Turton and Mrs. Callendar” a fortnight ago. “Some women are so—well,
ungenerous and snobby about Indians, and I should feel too ashamed
for words if I turned like them, but—and here’s my difficulty—there’s
nothing special about me, nothing specially good or strong, which
will help me to resist my environment and avoid becoming like them.
I’ve most lamentable defects. That’s why I want Akbar’s ‘universal
religion’ or the equivalent to keep me decent and sensible. Do you
see what I mean?”

Her remarks pleased him, but his mind shut up tight because she
had alluded to her marriage. He was not going to be mixed up in
that side of things. “You are certain to be happy with any relative
of Mrs. Moore’s,” he said with a formal bow.

“Oh, my happiness—that’s quite another problem. I want to consult
you about this Anglo-Indian difficulty. Can you give me any advice?”

“You are absolutely unlike the others, I assure you. You will never
be rude to my people.”

“I am told we all get rude after a year.”

“Then you are told a lie,” he flashed, for she had spoken the truth
and it touched him on the raw; it was itself an insult in these
particular circumstances. He recovered himself at once and laughed,
but her error broke up their conversation—their civilization it
had almost been—which scattered like the petals of a desert flower,
and left them in the middle of the hills. “Come along,” he said,
holding out a hand to each. They got up a little reluctantly, and
addressed themselves to sightseeing.

The first cave was tolerably convenient. They skirted the puddle
of water, and then climbed up over some unattractive stones, the
sun crashing on their backs. Bending their heads, they disappeared
one by one into the interior of the hills. The small black hole
gaped where their varied forms and colours had momentarily
functioned. They were sucked in like water down a drain. Bland and
bald rose the precipices; bland and glutinous the sky that connected
the precipices; solid and white, a Brahminy kite flapped between
the rocks with a clumsiness that seemed intentional. Before man,
with his itch for the seemly, had been born, the planet must have
looked thus. The kite flapped away. . . . Before birds, perhaps. . . .
And then the hole belched and humanity returned.

A Marabar cave had been horrid as far as Mrs. Moore was concerned,
for she had nearly fainted in it, and had some difficulty in
preventing herself from saying so as soon as she got into the air
again. It was natural enough: she had always suffered from
faintness, and the cave had become too full, because all their
retinue followed them. Crammed with villagers and servants, the
circular chamber began to smell. She lost Aziz and Adela in the
dark, didn’t know who touched her, couldn’t breathe, and some vile
naked thing struck her face and settled on her mouth like a pad.
She tried to regain the entrance tunnel, but an influx of villagers
swept her back. She hit her head. For an instant she went mad,
hitting and gasping like a fanatic. For not only did the crush and
stench alarm her; there was also a terrifying echo.

Professor Godbole had never mentioned an echo; it never impressed
him, perhaps. There are some exquisite echoes in India; there is
the whisper round the dome at Bijapur; there are the long, solid
sentences that voyage through the air at Mandu, and return unbroken
to their creator. The echo in a Marabar cave is not like these, it
is entirely devoid of distinction. Whatever is said, the same
monotonous noise replies, and quivers up and down the walls until
it is absorbed into the roof. “Boum” is the sound as far as the
human alphabet can express it, or “bou-oum,” or “ou-boum,”—utterly
dull. Hope, politeness, the blowing of a nose, the squeak of a
boot, all produce “boum.” Even the striking of a match starts a
little worm coiling, which is too small to complete a circle but
is eternally watchful. And if several people talk at once, an
overlapping howling noise begins, echoes generate echoes, and the
cave is stuffed with a snake composed of small snakes, which writhe
independently.

After Mrs. Moore all the others poured out. She had given the
signal for the reflux. Aziz and Adela both emerged smiling and she
did not want him to think his treat was a failure, so smiled too.
As each person emerged she looked for a villain, but none was
there, and she realized that she had been among the mildest
individuals, whose only desire was to honour her, and that the
naked pad was a poor little baby, astride its mother’s hip. Nothing
evil had been in the cave, but she had not enjoyed herself; no,
she had not enjoyed herself, and she decided not to visit a second
one.

“Did you see the reflection of his match—rather pretty?” asked
Adela.

“I forget . . .”

“But he says this isn’t a good cave, the best are on the Kawa Dol.”

“I don’t think I shall go on to there. I dislike climbing.”

“Very well, let’s sit down again in the shade until breakfast’s
ready.”

“Ah, but that’ll disappoint him so; he has taken such trouble. You
should go on; you don’t mind.”

“Perhaps I ought to,” said the girl, indifferent to what she did,
but desirous of being amiable.

The servants, etc., were scrambling back to the camp, pursued by
grave censures from Mohammed Latif. Aziz came to help the guests
over the rocks. He was at the summit of his powers, vigorous and
humble, too sure of himself to resent criticism, and he was
sincerely pleased when he heard they were altering his plans.
“Certainly, Miss Quested, so you and I will go together, and leave
Mrs. Moore here, and we will not be long, yet we will not hurry,
because we know that will be her wish.”

“Quite right. I’m sorry not to come too, but I’m a poor walker.”

“Dear Mrs. Moore, what does anything matter so long as you are my
guests? I am very glad you are _not_ coming, which sounds strange,
but you are treating me with true frankness, as a friend.”

“Yes, I am your friend,” she said, laying her hand on his sleeve,
and thinking, despite her fatigue, how very charming, how very
good, he was, and how deeply she desired his happiness. “So may I
make another suggestion? Don’t let so many people come with you
this time. I think you may find it more convenient.”

“Exactly, exactly,” he cried, and, rushing to the other extreme,
forbade all except one guide to accompany Miss Quested and him to
the Kawa Dol. “Is that all right?” he enquired.

“Quite right, now enjoy yourselves, and when you come back tell me
all about it.” And she sank into the deck-chair.

If they reached the big pocket of caves, they would be away nearly
an hour. She took out her writing-pad, and began, “Dear Stella,
Dear Ralph,” then stopped, and looked at the queer valley and their
feeble invasion of it. Even the elephant had become a nobody. Her
eye rose from it to the entrance tunnel. No, she did not wish to
repeat that experience. The more she thought over it, the more
disagreeable and frightening it became. She minded it much more
now than at the time. The crush and the smells she could forget,
but the echo began in some indescribable way to undermine her hold
on life. Coming at a moment when she chanced to be fatigued, it
had managed to murmur, “Pathos, piety, courage—they exist, but are
identical, and so is filth. Everything exists, nothing has value.”
If one had spoken vileness in that place, or quoted lofty poetry,
the comment would have been the same—“ou-boum.” If one had spoken
with the tongues of angels and pleaded for all the unhappiness and
misunderstanding in the world, past, present, and to come, for all
the misery men must undergo whatever their opinion and position,
and however much they dodge or bluff—it would amount to the same,
the serpent would descend and return to the ceiling. Devils are of
the North, and poems can be written about them, but no one could
romanticize the Marabar because it robbed infinity and eternity of
their vastness, the only quality that accommodates them to mankind.

She tried to go on with her letter, reminding herself that she was
only an elderly woman who had got up too early in the morning and
journeyed too far, that the despair creeping over her was merely
her despair, her personal weakness, and that even if she got a
sunstroke and went mad the rest of the world would go on. But
suddenly, at the edge of her mind, Religion appeared, poor little
talkative Christianity, and she knew that all its divine words from
“Let there be Light” to “It is finished” only amounted to “boum.”
Then she was terrified over an area larger than usual; the universe,
never comprehensible to her intellect, offered no repose to her
soul, the mood of the last two months took definite form at last,
and she realized that she didn’t want to write to her children,
didn’t want to communicate with anyone, not even with God. She sat
motionless with horror, and, when old Mohammed Latif came up to
her, thought he would notice a difference. For a time she thought,
“I am going to be ill,” to comfort herself, then she surrendered
to the vision. She lost all interest, even in Aziz, and the
affectionate and sincere words that she had spoken to him seemed
no longer hers but the air’s.




  CHAPTER XV


Miss Quested and Aziz and a guide continued the slightly tedious
expedition. They did not talk much, for the sun was getting high.
The air felt like a warm bath into which hotter water is trickling
constantly, the temperature rose and rose, the boulders said, “I
am alive,” the small stones answered, “I am almost alive.” Between
the chinks lay the ashes of little plants. They meant to climb to
the rocking-stone on the summit, but it was too far, and they
contented themselves with the big group of caves. _En route_ for
these, they encountered several isolated caves, which the guide
persuaded them to visit, but really there was nothing to see; they
lit a match, admired its reflection in the polish, tested the echo
and came out again. Aziz was “pretty sure they should come on some
interesting old carvings soon,” but only meant he wished there were
some carvings. His deeper thoughts were about the breakfast.
Symptoms of disorganization had appeared as he left the camp. He
ran over the menu: an English breakfast, porridge and mutton chops,
but some Indian dishes to cause conversation, and pan afterwards.
He had never liked Miss Quested as much as Mrs. Moore, and had
little to say to her, less than ever now that she would marry a
British official.

Nor had Adela much to say to him. If his mind was with the
breakfast, hers was mainly with her marriage. Simla next week, get
rid of Antony, a view of Thibet, tiresome wedding bells, Agra in
October, see Mrs. Moore comfortably off from Bombay—the procession
passed before her again, blurred by the heat, and then she turned
to the more serious business of her life at Chandrapore. There were
real difficulties here—Ronny’s limitations and her own—but she
enjoyed facing difficulties, and decided that if she could control
her peevishness (always her weak point), and neither rail against
Anglo-India nor succumb to it, their married life ought to be happy
and profitable. She mustn’t be too theoretical; she would deal with
each problem as it came up, and trust to Ronny’s common sense and
her own. Luckily, each had abundance of common sense and good will.

But as she toiled over a rock that resembled an inverted saucer,
she thought, “What about love?” The rock was nicked by a double
row of footholds, and somehow the question was suggested by them.
Where had she seen footholds before? Oh yes, they were the pattern
traced in the dust by the wheels of the Nawab Bahadur’s car. She
and Ronny—no, they did not love each other.

“Do I take you too fast?” enquired Aziz, for she had paused, a
doubtful expression on her face. The discovery had come so suddenly
that she felt like a mountaineer whose rope had broken. Not to love
the man one’s going to marry! Not to find it out till this moment!
Not even to have asked oneself the question until now! Something
else to think out. Vexed rather than appalled, she stood still,
her eyes on the sparkling rock. There was esteem and animal contact
at dusk, but the emotion that links them was absent. Ought she to
break her engagement off? She was inclined to think not—it would
cause so much trouble to others; besides, she wasn’t convinced that
love is necessary to a successful union. If love is everything,
few marriages would survive the honeymoon. “No, I’m all right,
thanks,” she said, and, her emotions well under control, resumed
the climb, though she felt a bit dashed. Aziz held her hand, the
guide adhered to the surface like a lizard and scampered about as
if governed by a personal centre of gravity.

“Are you married, Dr. Aziz?” she asked, stopping again, and
frowning.

“Yes, indeed, do come and see my wife”—for he felt it more artistic
to have his wife alive for a moment.

“Thank you,” she said absently.

“She is not in Chandrapore just now.”

“And have you children?”

“Yes, indeed, three,” he replied in firmer tones.

“Are they a great pleasure to you?”

“Why, naturally, I adore them,” he laughed.

“I suppose so.” What a handsome little Oriental he was, and no
doubt his wife and children were beautiful too, for people usually
get what they already possess. She did not admire him with any
personal warmth, for there was nothing of the vagrant in her blood,
but she guessed he might attract women of his own race and rank,
and she regretted that neither she nor Ronny had physical charm.
It does make a difference in a relationship—beauty, thick hair, a
fine skin. Probably this man had several wives—Mohammedans always
insist on their full four, according to Mrs. Turton. And having no
one else to speak to on that eternal rock, she gave rein to the
subject of marriage and said in her honest, decent, inquisitive
way: “Have you one wife or more than one?”

The question shocked the young man very much. It challenged a new
conviction of his community, and new convictions are more sensitive
than old. If she had said, “Do you worship one god or several?” he
would not have objected. But to ask an educated Indian Moslem how
many wives he has—appalling, hideous! He was in trouble how to
conceal his confusion. “One, one in my own particular case,” he
sputtered, and let go of her hand. Quite a number of caves were at
the top of the track, and thinking, “Damn the English even at their
best,” he plunged into one of them to recover his balance. She
followed at her leisure, quite unconscious that she had said the
wrong thing, and not seeing him, she also went into a cave, thinking
with half her mind “sight-seeing bores me,” and wondering with the
other half about marriage.




  CHAPTER XVI


He waited in his cave a minute, and lit a cigarette, so that he
could remark on rejoining her, “I bolted in to get out of the
draught,” or something of the sort. When he returned, he found the
guide, alone, with his head on one side. He had heard a noise, he
said, and then Aziz heard it too: the noise of a motor-car. They
were now on the outer shoulder of the Kawa Dol, and by scrambling
twenty yards they got a glimpse of the plain. A car was coming
towards the hills down the Chandrapore road. But they could not
get a good view of it, because the precipitous bastion curved at
the top, so that the base was not easily seen and the car
disappeared as it came nearer. No doubt it would stop almost
exactly beneath them, at the place where the pukka road degenerated
into a path, and the elephant had turned to sidle into the hills.

He ran back, to tell the strange news to his guest. The guide
explained that she had gone into a cave. “Which cave?”

He indicated the group vaguely.

“You should have kept her in sight, it was your duty,” said Aziz
severely. “Here are twelve caves at least. How am I to know which
contains my guest? Which is the cave I was in myself?”

The same vague gesture. And Aziz, looking again, could not even be
sure he had returned to the same group. Caves appeared in every
direction—it seemed their original spawning place—and the orifices
were always the same size. He thought, “Merciful Heavens, Miss
Quested is lost,” then pulled himself together, and began to look
for her calmly.

“Shout!” he commanded.

When they had done this for awhile, the guide explained that to
shout is useless, because a Marabar cave can hear no sound but its
own. Aziz wiped his head, and sweat began to stream inside his
clothes. The place was so confusing; it was partly a terrace,
partly a zigzag, and full of grooves that led this way and that
like snake-tracks. He tried to go into every one, but he never knew
where he had started. Caves got behind caves or confabulated in
pairs, and some were at the entrance of a gully.

“Come here!” he called gently, and when the guide was in reach, he
struck him in the face for a punishment. The man fled, and he was
left alone. He thought, “This is the end of my career, my guest is
lost.” And then he discovered the simple and sufficient explanation
of the mystery.

Miss Quested wasn’t lost. She had joined the people in the
car—friends of hers, no doubt, Mr. Heaslop perhaps. He had a sudden
glimpse of her, far down the gully—only a glimpse, but there she
was quite plain, framed between rocks, and speaking to another
lady. He was so relieved that he did not think her conduct odd.
Accustomed to sudden changes of plan, he supposed that she had run
down the Kawa Dol impulsively, in the hope of a little drive. He
started back alone towards his camp, and almost at once caught
sight of something which would have disquieted him very much a
moment before: Miss Quested’s field-glasses. They were lying at
the verge of a cave, half-way down an entrance tunnel. He tried to
hang them over his shoulder, but the leather strap had broken, so
he put them into his pocket instead. When he had gone a few steps,
he thought she might have dropped something else, so he went back
to look.

But the previous difficulty recurred: he couldn’t identify the
cave. Down in the plain he heard the car starting; however, he
couldn’t catch a second glimpse of that. So he scrambled down the
valley-face of the hill towards Mrs. Moore, and here he was more
successful: the colour and confusion of his little camp soon
appeared, and in the midst of it he saw an Englishman’s topi, and
beneath it—oh joy!—smiled not Mr. Heaslop, but Fielding.

“Fielding! Oh, I have so wanted you!” he cried, dropping the “Mr.”
for the first time.

And his friend ran to meet him, all so pleasant and jolly, no
dignity, shouting explanations and apologies about the train.
Fielding had come in the newly arrived car—Miss Derek’s car—that
other lady was Miss Derek. Chatter, chatter, all the servants
leaving their cooking to listen. Excellent Miss Derek! She had met
Fielding by chance at the post office, said, “Why haven’t you gone
to the Marabar?” heard how he missed the train, offered to run him
there and then. Another nice English lady. Where was she? Left with
car and chauffeur while Fielding found camp. Car couldn’t get
up—no, of course not—hundreds of people must go down to escort Miss
Derek and show her the way. The elephant in person. . . .

“Aziz, can I have a drink?”

“Certainly not.” He flew to get one.

“Mr. Fielding!” called Mrs. Moore, from her patch of shade; they
had not spoken yet, because his arrival had coincided with the
torrent from the hill.

“Good morning again!” he cried, relieved to find all well.

“Mr. Fielding, have you seen Miss Quested?”

“But I’ve only just arrived. Where is she?”

“I do not know.”

“Aziz! Where have you put Miss Quested to?” Aziz, who was returning
with a drink in his hand, had to think for a moment. His heart was
full of new happiness. The picnic, after a nasty shock or two, had
developed into something beyond his dreams, for Fielding had not
only come, but brought an uninvited guest. “Oh, she’s all right,”
he said; “she went down to see Miss Derek. Well, here’s luck!
Chin-chin!”

“Here’s luck, but chin-chin I do refuse,” laughed Fielding, who
detested the phrase. “Here’s to India!”

“Here’s luck, and here’s to England!”

Miss Derek’s chauffeur stopped the cavalcade which was starting to
escort his mistress up, and informed it that she had gone back with
the other young lady to Chandrapore; she had sent him to say so.
She was driving herself.

“Oh yes, that’s quite likely,” said Aziz. “I knew they’d gone for
a spin.”

“Chandrapore? The man’s made a mistake,” Fielding exclaimed.

“Oh no, why?” He was disappointed, but made light of it; no doubt
the two young ladies were great friends. He would prefer to give
breakfast to all four; still, guests must do as they wish, or they
become prisoners. He went away cheerfully to inspect the porridge
and the ice.

“What’s happened?” asked Fielding, who felt at once that something
had gone queer. All the way out Miss Derek had chattered about the
picnic, called it an unexpected treat, and said that she preferred
Indians who didn’t invite her to their entertainments to those who
did it. Mrs. Moore sat swinging her foot, and appeared sulky and
stupid. She said: “Miss Derek is most unsatisfactory and restless,
always in a hurry, always wanting something new; she will do
anything in the world except go back to the Indian lady who pays
her.”

Fielding, who didn’t dislike Miss Derek, replied: “She wasn’t in
a hurry when I left her. There was no question of returning to
Chandrapore. It looks to me as if Miss Quested’s in the hurry.”

“Adela?—she’s never been in a hurry in her life,” said the old lady
sharply.

“I say it’ll prove to be Miss Quested’s wish, in fact I know it
is,” persisted the schoolmaster. He was annoyed—chiefly with
himself. He had begun by missing a train—a sin he was never guilty
of—and now that he did arrive it was to upset Aziz’ arrangements
for the second time. He wanted someone to share the blame, and
frowned at Mrs. Moore rather magisterially. “Aziz is a charming
fellow,” he announced.

“I know,” she answered, with a yawn.

“He has taken endless trouble to make a success of our picnic.”

They knew one another very little, and felt rather awkward at being
drawn together by an Indian. The racial problem can take subtle
forms. In their case it had induced a sort of jealousy, a mutual
suspicion. He tried to goad her enthusiasm; she scarcely spoke.
Aziz fetched them to breakfast.

“It is quite natural about Miss Quested,” he remarked, for he had
been working the incident a little in his mind, to get rid of its
roughnesses. “We were having an interesting talk with our guide,
then the car was seen, so she decided to go down to her friend.”
Incurably inaccurate, he already thought that this was what had
occurred. He was inaccurate because he was sensitive. He did not
like to remember Miss Quested’s remark about polygamy, because it
was unworthy of a guest, so he put it from his mind, and with it
the knowledge that he had bolted into a cave to get away from her.
He was inaccurate because he desired to honour her, and—facts being
entangled—he had to arrange them in her vicinity, as one tidies
the ground after extracting a weed. Before breakfast was over, he
had told a good many lies. “She ran to her friend, I to mine,” he
went on, smiling. “And now I am with my friends and they are with
me and each other, which is happiness.”

Loving them both, he expected them to love each other. They didn’t
want to. Fielding thought with hostility, “I knew these women would
make trouble,” and Mrs. Moore thought, “This man, having missed
the train, tries to blame us”; but her thoughts were feeble; since
her faintness in the cave she was sunk in apathy and cynicism. The
wonderful India of her opening weeks, with its cool nights and
acceptable hints of infinity, had vanished.

Fielding ran up to see one cave. He wasn’t impressed. Then they
got on the elephant and the picnic began to unwind out of the
corridor and escaped under the precipice towards the railway
station, pursued by stabs of hot air. They came to the place where
he had quitted the car. A disagreeable thought now struck him, and
he said: “Aziz, exactly where and how did you leave Miss Quested?”

“Up there.” He indicated the Kawa Dol cheerfully.

“But how——” A gully, or rather a crease, showed among the rocks at
this place; it was scurfy with cactuses. “I suppose the guide
helped her.”

“Oh, rather, most helpful.”

“Is there a path off the top?”

“Millions of paths, my dear fellow.”

Fielding could see nothing but the crease. Everywhere else the
glaring granite plunged into the earth.

“But you saw them get down safe?”

“Yes, yes, she and Miss Derek, and go off in the car.”

“Then the guide came back to you?”

“Exactly. Got a cigarette?”

“I hope she wasn’t ill,” pursued the Englishman. The crease
continued as a nullah across the plain, the water draining off this
way towards the Ganges.

“She would have wanted me, if she was ill, to attend her.”

“Yes, that sounds sense.”

“I see you’re worrying, let’s talk of other things,” he said
kindly. “Miss Quested was always to do what she wished, it was our
arrangement. I see you are worrying on my account, but really I
don’t mind, I never notice trifles.”

“I do worry on your account. I consider they have been impolite!”
said Fielding, lowering his voice. “She had no right to dash away
from your party, and Miss Derek had no right to abet her.”

So touchy as a rule, Aziz was unassailable. The wings that uplifted
him did not falter, because he was a Mogul emperor who had done
his duty. Perched on his elephant, he watched the Marabar Hills
recede, and saw again, as provinces of his kingdom, the grim untidy
plain, the frantic and feeble movements of the buckets, the white
shrines, the shallow graves, the suave sky, the snake that looked
like a tree. He had given his guests as good a time as he could,
and if they came late or left early that was not his affair. Mrs.
Moore slept, swaying against the rods of the howdah, Mohammed Latif
embraced her with efficiency and respect, and by his own side sat
Fielding, whom he began to think of as “Cyril.”

“Aziz, have you figured out what this picnic will cost you?”

“Sh! my dear chap, don’t mention that part. Hundreds and hundreds
of rupees. The completed account will be too awful; my friends’
servants have robbed me right and left, and as for an elephant,
she apparently eats gold. I can trust you not to repeat this. And
M.L.—please employ initials, he listens—is far the worst of all.”

“I told you he’s no good.”

“He is plenty of good for himself; his dishonesty will ruin me.”

“Aziz, how monstrous!”

“I am delighted with him really, he has made my guests comfortable;
besides, it is my duty to employ him, he is my cousin. If money
goes, money comes. If money stays, death comes. Did you ever hear
that useful Urdu proverb? Probably not, for I have just invented
it.”

“My proverbs are: A penny saved is a penny earned; A stitch in time
saves nine; Look before you leap; and the British Empire rests on
them. You will never kick us out, you know, until you cease
employing M.L.’s and such.”

“Oh, kick you out? Why should I trouble over that dirty job? Leave
it to the politicians. . . . No, when I was a student I got excited
over your damned countrymen, certainly; but if they’ll let me get
on with my profession and not be too rude to me officially, I
really don’t ask for more.”

“But you do; you take them to a picnic.”

“This picnic is nothing to do with English or Indian; it is an
expedition of friends.”

So the cavalcade ended, partly pleasant, partly not; the Brahman
cook was picked up, the train arrived, pushing its burning throat
over the plain, and the twentieth century took over from the
sixteenth. Mrs. Moore entered her carriage, the three men went to
theirs, adjusted the shutters, turned on the electric fan and tried
to get some sleep. In the twilight, all resembled corpses, and the
train itself seemed dead though it moved—a coffin from the
scientific north which troubled the scenery four times a day. As
it left the Marabars, their nasty little cosmos disappeared, and
gave place to the Marabars seen from a distance, finite and rather
romantic. The train halted once under a pump, to drench the stock
of coal in its tender. Then it caught sight of the main line in
the distance, took courage, and bumped forward, rounded the civil
station, surmounted the level-crossing (the rails were scorching
now), and clanked to a stand-still. Chandrapore, Chandrapore! The
expedition was over.

And as it ended, as they sat up in the gloom and prepared to enter
ordinary life, suddenly the long drawn strangeness of the morning
snapped. Mr. Haq, the Inspector of Police, flung open the door of
their carriage and said in shrill tones: “Dr. Aziz, it is my highly
painful duty to arrest you.”

“Hullo, some mistake,” said Fielding, at once taking charge of the
situation.

“Sir, they are my instructions. I know nothing.”

“On what charge do you arrest him?”

“I am under instructions not to say.”

“Don’t answer me like that. Produce your warrant.”

“Sir, excuse me, no warrant is required under these particular
circumstances. Refer to Mr. McBryde.”

“Very well, so we will. Come along, Aziz, old man; nothing to fuss
about, some blunder.”

“Dr. Aziz, will you kindly come?—a closed conveyance stands in
readiness.”

The young man sobbed—his first sound—and tried to escape out of
the opposite door on to the line.

“That will compel me to use force,” Mr. Haq wailed.

“Oh, for God’s sake——” cried Fielding, his own nerves breaking
under the contagion, and pulled him back before a scandal started,
and shook him like a baby. A second later, and he would have been
out, whistles blowing, a man-hunt. . . . “Dear fellow, we’re coming
to McBryde together, and enquire what’s gone wrong—he’s a decent
fellow, it’s all unintentional . . . he’ll apologize. Never, never
act the criminal.”

“My children and my name!” he gasped, his wings broken.

“Nothing of the sort. Put your hat straight and take my arm. I’ll
see you through.”

“Ah, thank God, he comes,” the Inspector exclaimed. They emerged
into the midday heat, arm in arm. The station was seething.
Passengers and porters rushed out of every recess, many Government
servants, more police. Ronny escorted Mrs. Moore. Mohammed Latif
began wailing. And before they could make their way through the
chaos, Fielding was called off by the authoritative tones of Mr.
Turton, and Aziz went on to prison alone.




  CHAPTER XVII


The Collector had watched the arrest from the interior of the
waiting-room, and throwing open its perforated doors of zinc, he
was now revealed like a god in a shrine. When Fielding entered the
doors clapped to, and were guarded by a servant, while a punkah,
to mark the importance of the moment, flapped dirty petticoats over
their heads. The Collector could not speak at first. His face was
white, fanatical, and rather beautiful—the expression that all
English faces were to wear at Chandrapore for many days. Always
brave and unselfish, he was now fused by some white and generous
heat; he would have killed himself, obviously, if he had thought
it right to do so. He spoke at last. “The worst thing in my whole
career has happened,” he said. “Miss Quested has been insulted in
one of the Marabar caves.”

“Oh no, oh no, no,” gasped the other, feeling sickish.

“She escaped—by God’s grace.”

“Oh no, no, but not Aziz . . . not Aziz . . .”

He nodded.

“Absolutely impossible, grotesque.”

“I called you to preserve you from the odium that would attach to
you if you were seen accompanying him to the Police Station,” said
Turton, paying no attention to his protest, indeed scarcely hearing
it.

He repeated “Oh no,” like a fool. He couldn’t frame other words.
He felt that a mass of madness had arisen and tried to overwhelm
them all; it had to be shoved back into its pit somehow, and he
didn’t know how to do it, because he did not understand madness:
he had always gone about sensibly and quietly until a difficulty
came right. “Who lodges this infamous charge?” he asked, pulling
himself together.

“Miss Derek and—the victim herself. . . .” He nearly broke down,
unable to repeat the girl’s name.

“Miss Quested herself definitely accuses him of——”

He nodded and turned his face away.

“Then she’s mad.”

“I cannot pass that last remark,” said the Collector, waking up to
the knowledge that they differed, and trembling with fury. “You
will withdraw it instantly. It is the type of remark you have
permitted yourself to make ever since you came to Chandrapore.”

“I’m excessively sorry, sir; I certainly withdraw it unconditionally.”
For the man was half mad himself.

“Pray, Mr. Fielding, what induced you to speak to me in such a
tone?”

“The news gave me a very great shock, so I must ask you to forgive
me. I cannot believe that Dr. Aziz is guilty.”

He slammed his hand on the table. “That—that is a repetition of
your insult in an aggravated form.”

“If I may venture to say so, no,” said Fielding, also going white,
but sticking to his point. “I make no reflection on the good faith
of the two ladies, but the charge they are bringing against Aziz
rests upon some mistake, and five minutes will clear it up. The
man’s manner is perfectly natural; besides, I know him to be
incapable of infamy.”

“It does indeed rest upon a mistake,” came the thin, biting voice
of the other. “It does indeed. I have had twenty-five years’
experience of this country”—he paused, and “twenty-five years”
seemed to fill the waiting-room with their staleness and
ungenerosity—“and during those twenty-five years I have never known
anything but disaster result when English people and Indians
attempt to be intimate socially. Intercourse, yes. Courtesy, by
all means. Intimacy—never, never. The whole weight of my authority
is against it. I have been in charge at Chandrapore for six years,
and if everything has gone smoothly, if there has been mutual
respect and esteem, it is because both peoples kept to this simple
rule. New-comers set our traditions aside, and in an instant what
you see happens, the work of years is undone and the good name of
my District ruined for a generation. I—I—can’t see the end of this
day’s work, Mr. Fielding. You, who are imbued with modern ideas—no
doubt you can. I wish I had never lived to see its beginning, I
know that. It is the end of me. That a lady, that a young lady
engaged to my most valued subordinate—that she—an English girl
fresh from England—that I should have lived——”

Involved in his own emotions, he broke down. What he had said was
both dignified and pathetic, but had it anything to do with Aziz?
Nothing at all, if Fielding was right. It is impossible to regard
a tragedy from two points of view, and whereas Turton had decided
to avenge the girl, he hoped to save the man. He wanted to get away
and talk to McBryde, who had always been friendly to him, was on
the whole sensible, and could, anyhow, be trusted to keep cool.

“I came down particularly on your account—while poor Heaslop got
his mother away. I regarded it as the most friendly thing I could
do. I meant to tell you that there will be an informal meeting at
the club this evening to discuss the situation, but I am doubtful
whether you will care to come. Your visits there are always
infrequent.”

“I shall certainly come, sir, and I am most grateful to you for
all the trouble you have taken over me. May I venture to ask—where
Miss Quested is.”

He replied with a gesture; she was ill.

“Worse and worse, appalling,” he said feelingly.

But the Collector looked at him sternly, because he was keeping
his head. He had not gone mad at the phrase “an English girl fresh
from England,” he had not rallied to the banner of race. He was
still after facts, though the herd had decided on emotion. Nothing
enrages Anglo-India more than the lantern of reason if it is
exhibited for one moment after its extinction is decreed. All over
Chandrapore that day the Europeans were putting aside their normal
personalities and sinking themselves in their community. Pity,
wrath, heroism, filled them, but the power of putting two and two
together was annihilated.

Terminating the interview, the Collector walked on to the platform.
The confusion there was revolting. A chuprassi of Ronny’s had been
told to bring up some trifles belonging to the ladies, and was
appropriating for himself various articles to which he had no
right; he was a camp follower of the angry English. Mohammed Latif
made no attempt to resist him. Hassan flung off his turban, and
wept. All the comforts that had been provided so liberally were
rolled about and wasted in the sun. The Collector took in the
situation at a glance, and his sense of justice functioned though
he was insane with rage. He spoke the necessary word, and the
looting stopped. Then he drove off to his bungalow and gave rein
to his passions again. When he saw the coolies asleep in the
ditches or the shopkeepers rising to salute him on their little
platforms, he said to himself: “I know what you’re like at last;
you shall pay for this, you shall squeal.”




  CHAPTER XVIII


Mr. McBryde, the District Superintendent of Police, was the most
reflective and best educated of the Chandrapore officials. He had
read and thought a good deal, and, owing to a somewhat unhappy
marriage, had evolved a complete philosophy of life. There was much
of the cynic about him, but nothing of the bully; he never lost
his temper or grew rough, and he received Aziz with courtesy, was
almost reassuring. “I have to detain you until you get bail,” he
said, “but no doubt your friends will be applying for it, and of
course they will be allowed to visit you, under regulations. I am
given certain information, and have to act on it—I’m not your
judge.” Aziz was led off weeping. Mr. McBryde was shocked at his
downfall, but no Indian ever surprised him, because he had a theory
about climatic zones. The theory ran: “All unfortunate natives are
criminals at heart, for the simple reason that they live south of
latitude 30. They are not to blame, they have not a dog’s chance—we
should be like them if we settled here.” Born at Karachi, he seemed
to contradict his theory, and would sometimes admit as much with
a sad, quiet smile.

“Another of them found out,” he thought, as he set to work to draft
his statement to the Magistrate.

He was interrupted by the arrival of Fielding.

He imparted all he knew without reservations. Miss Derek had
herself driven in the Mudkul car about an hour ago, she and Miss
Quested both in a terrible state. They had gone straight to his
bungalow where he happened to be, and there and then he had taken
down the charge and arranged for the arrest at the railway station.

“What is the charge, precisely?”

“That he followed her into the cave and made insulting advances.
She hit at him with her field-glasses; he pulled at them and the
strap broke, and that is how she got away. When we searched him
just now, they were in his pocket.”

“Oh no, oh no, no; it’ll be cleared up in five minutes,” he cried
again.

“Have a look at them.”

The strap had been newly broken, the eye-piece was jammed. The
logic of evidence said “Guilty.”

“Did she say any more?”

“There was an echo that appears to have frightened her. Did you go
into those caves?”

“I saw one of them. There was an echo. Did it get on her nerves?”

“I couldn’t worry her overmuch with questions. She’ll have plenty
to go through in the witness-box. They don’t bear thinking about,
these next weeks. I wish the Marabar Hills and all they contain
were at the bottom of the sea. Evening after evening one saw them
from the club, and they were just a harmless name. . . . Yes, we
start already.” For a visiting card was brought; Vakil Mahmoud Ali,
legal adviser to the prisoner, asked to be allowed to see him.
McBryde sighed, gave permission, and continued: “I heard some more
from Miss Derek—she is an old friend of us both and talks freely;
well—her account is that you went off to locate the camp, and
almost at once she heard stones falling on the Kawa Dol and saw
Miss Quested running straight down the face of a precipice. Well.
She climbed up a sort of gully to her, and found her practically
done for—her helmet off——”

“Was a guide not with her?” interrupted Fielding.

“No. She had got among some cactuses. Miss Derek saved her life
coming just then—she was beginning to fling herself about. She
helped her down to the car. Miss Quested couldn’t stand the Indian
driver, cried, ‘Keep him away’—and it was that that put our friend
on the track of what had happened. They made straight for our
bungalow, and are there now. That’s the story as far as I know it
yet. She sent the driver to join you. I think she behaved with
great sense.”

“I suppose there’s no possibility of my seeing Miss Quested?” he
asked suddenly.

“I hardly think that would do. Surely.”

“I was afraid you’ld say that. I should very much like to.”

“She is in no state to see anyone. Besides, you don’t know her
well.”

“Hardly at all. . . . But you see I believe she’s under some
hideous delusion, and that that wretched boy is innocent.”

The policeman started in surprise, and a shadow passed over his
face, for he could not bear his dispositions to be upset. “I had
no idea that was in your mind,” he said, and looked for support at
the signed deposition, which lay before him.

“Those field-glasses upset me for a minute, but I’ve thought since:
it’s impossible that, having attempted to assault her, he would
put her glasses into his pocket.”

“Quite possible, I’m afraid; when an Indian goes bad, he goes not
only very bad, but very queer.”

“I don’t follow.”

“How should you? When you think of crime you think of English
crime. The psychology here is different. I dare say you’ll tell me
next that he was quite normal when he came down from the hill to
greet you. No reason he should not be. Read any of the Mutiny
records; which, rather than the Bhagavad Gita, should be your Bible
in this country. Though I’m not sure that the one and the other
are not closely connected. Am I not being beastly? But, you see,
Fielding, as I’ve said to you once before, you’re a schoolmaster,
and consequently you come across these people at their best. That’s
what puts you wrong. They can be charming as boys. But I know them
as they really are, after they have developed into men. Look at
this, for instance.” He held up Aziz’ pocket-case. “I am going
through the contents. They are not edifying. Here is a letter from
a friend who apparently keeps a brothel.”

“I don’t want to hear his private letters.”

“It’ll have to be quoted in Court, as bearing on his morals. He
was fixing up to see women at Calcutta.”

“Oh, that’ll do, that’ll do.”

McBryde stopped, naively puzzled. It was obvious to him that any
two sahibs ought to pool all they knew about any Indian, and he
could not think where the objection came in.

“I dare say you have the right to throw stones at a young man for
doing that, but I haven’t. I did the same at his age.”

So had the Superintendent of Police, but he considered that the
conversation had taken a turn that was undesirable. He did not like
Fielding’s next remark either.

“Miss Quested really cannot be seen? You do know that for a
certainty?”

“You have never explained to me what’s in your mind here. Why on
earth do you want to see her?”

“On the off chance of her recanting before you send in that report
and he’s committed for trial, and the whole thing goes to blazes.
Old man, don’t argue about this, but do of your goodness just ring
up your wife or Miss Derek and enquire. It’ll cost you nothing.”

“It’s no use ringing up them,” he replied, stretching out for the
telephone. “Callendar settles a question like that, of course. You
haven’t grasped that she’s seriously ill.”

“He’s sure to refuse, it’s all he exists for,” said the other
desperately.

The expected answer came back: the Major would not hear of the
patient being troubled.

“I only wanted to ask her whether she is certain, dead certain,
that it was Aziz who followed her into the cave.”

“Possibly my wife might ask her that much.”

“But _I_ wanted to ask her. I want someone who believes in him to
ask her.”

“What difference does that make?”

“She is among people who disbelieve in Indians.”

“Well, she tells her own story, doesn’t she?”

“I know, but she tells it to you.”

McBryde raised his eyebrows, murmuring: “A bit too finespun.
Anyhow, Callendar won’t hear of you seeing her. I’m sorry to say
he gave a bad account just now. He says that she is by no means
out of danger.”

They were silent. Another card was brought into the
office—Hamidullah’s. The opposite army was gathering.

“I must put this report through now, Fielding.”

“I wish you wouldn’t.”

“How can I not?”

“I feel that things are rather unsatisfactory as well as most
disastrous. We are heading for a most awful smash. I can see your
prisoner, I suppose.”

He hesitated. “His own people seem in touch with him all right.”

“Well, when he’s done with them.”

“I wouldn’t keep you waiting; good heavens, you take precedence of
any Indian visitor, of course. I meant what’s the good. Why mix
yourself up with pitch?”

“I say he’s innocent——”

“Innocence or guilt, why mix yourself up? What’s the good?”

“Oh, good, good,” he cried, feeling that every earth was being
stopped. “One’s got to breathe occasionally, at least I have. I
mayn’t see her, and now I mayn’t see him. I promised him to come
up here with him to you, but Turton called me off before I could
get two steps.”

“Sort of all-white thing the Burra Sahib would do,” he muttered
sentimentally. And trying not to sound patronizing, he stretched
his hand over the table, and said: “We shall all have to hang
together, old man, I’m afraid. I’m your junior in years, I know,
but very much your senior in service; you don’t happen to know this
poisonous country as well as I do, and you must take it from me
that the general situation is going to be nasty at Chandrapore
during the next few weeks, very nasty indeed.”

“So I have just told you.”

“But at a time like this there’s no room for—well—personal views.
The man who doesn’t toe the line is lost.”

“I see what you mean.”

“No, you don’t see entirely. He not only loses himself, he weakens
his friends. If you leave the line, you leave a gap in the line.
These jackals”—he pointed at the lawyers’ cards—“are looking with
all their eyes for a gap.”

“Can I visit Aziz?” was his answer.

“No.” Now that he knew of Turton’s attitude, the policeman had no
doubts. “You may see him on a magistrate’s order, but on my own
responsibility I don’t feel justified. It might lead to more
complications.”

He paused, reflecting that if he had been either ten years younger
or ten years longer in India, he would have responded to McBryde’s
appeal. The bit between his teeth, he then said, “To whom do I
apply for an order?”

“City Magistrate.”

“That sounds comfortable!”

“Yes, one can’t very well worry poor Heaslop.”

More “evidence” appeared at this moment—the table-drawer from Aziz’
bungalow, borne with triumph in a corporal’s arms.

“Photographs of women. Ah!”

“That’s his wife,” said Fielding, wincing.

“How do you know that?”

“He told me.”

McBryde gave a faint, incredulous smile, and started rummaging in
the drawer. His face became inquisitive and slightly bestial. “Wife
indeed, I know those wives!” he was thinking. Aloud he said: “Well,
you must trot off now, old man, and the Lord help us, the Lord help
us all. . .”

As if his prayer had been heard, there was a sudden rackety-dacket
on a temple bell.




  CHAPTER XIX


Hamidullah was the next stage. He was waiting outside the
Superintendent’s office, and sprang up respectfully when he saw
Fielding. To the Englishman’s passionate “It’s all a mistake,” he
answered, “Ah, ah, has some evidence come?”

“It will come,” said Fielding, holding his hand.

“Ah, yes, Mr. Fielding; but when once an Indian has been arrested,
we do not know where it will stop.” His manner was deferential.
“You are very good to greet me in this public fashion, I appreciate
it; but, Mr. Fielding, nothing convinces a magistrate except
evidence. Did Mr. McBryde make any remark when my card came in? Do
you think my application annoyed him, will prejudice him against
my friend at all? If so, I will gladly retire.”

“He’s not annoyed, and if he was, what does it matter?”

“Ah, it’s all very well for you to speak like that, but we have to
live in this country.”

The leading barrister of Chandrapore, with the dignified manner
and Cambridge degree, had been rattled. He too loved Aziz, and knew
he was calumniated; but faith did not rule his heart, and he prated
of “policy” and “evidence” in a way that saddened the Englishman.
Fielding, too, had his anxieties—he didn’t like the field-glasses
or the discrepancy over the guide—but he relegated them to the edge
of his mind, and forbade them to infect its core. Aziz _was_
innocent, and all action must be based on that, and the people who
said he was guilty were wrong, and it was hopeless to try to
propitiate them. At the moment when he was throwing in his lot with
Indians, he realized the profundity of the gulf that divided him
from them. They always do something disappointing. Aziz had tried
to run away from the police, Mohammed Latif had not checked the
pilfering. And now Hamidullah!—instead of raging and denouncing,
he temporized. Are Indians cowards? No, but they are bad starters
and occasionally jib. Fear is everywhere; the British Raj rests on
it; the respect and courtesy Fielding himself enjoyed were
unconscious acts of propitiation. He told Hamidullah to cheer up,
all would end well; and Hamidullah did cheer up, and became
pugnacious and sensible. McBryde’s remark, “If you leave the line,
you leave a gap in the line,” was being illustrated.

“First and foremost, the question of bail . . .”

Application must be made this afternoon. Fielding wanted to stand
surety. Hamidullah thought the Nawab Bahadur should be approached.

“Why drag in him, though?”

To drag in everyone was precisely the barrister’s aim. He then
suggested that the lawyer in charge of the case would be a Hindu;
the defence would then make a wider appeal. He mentioned one or
two names—men from a distance who would not be intimidated by local
conditions—and said he should prefer Amritrao, a Calcutta barrister,
who had a high reputation professionally and personally, but who
was notoriously anti-British.

Fielding demurred; this seemed to him going to the other extreme.
Aziz must be cleared, but with a minimum of racial hatred. Amritrao
was loathed at the club. His retention would be regarded as a
political challenge.

“Oh no, we must hit with all our strength. When I saw my friend’s
private papers carried in just now in the arms of a dirty policeman,
I said to myself, ‘Amritrao is the man to clear up this.’”

There was a lugubrious pause. The temple bell continued to jangle
harshly. The interminable and disastrous day had scarcely reached
its afternoon. Continuing their work, the wheels of Dominion now
propelled a messenger on a horse from the Superintendent to the
Magistrate with an official report of arrest. “Don’t complicate,
let the cards play themselves,” entreated Fielding, as he watched
the man disappear into dust. “We’re bound to win, there’s nothing
else we can do. She will never be able to substantiate the charge.”

This comforted Hamidullah, who remarked with complete sincerity,
“At a crisis, the English are really unequalled.”

“Good-bye, then, my dear Hamidullah (we must drop the ‘Mr.’ now).
Give Aziz my love when you see him, and tell him to keep calm,
calm, calm. I shall go back to the College now. If you want me,
ring me up; if you don’t, don’t, for I shall be very busy.”

“Good-bye, my dear Fielding, and you actually are on our side
against your own people?”

“Yes. Definitely.”

He regretted taking sides. To slink through India unlabelled was
his aim. Henceforward he would be called “anti-British,”
“seditious”—terms that bored him, and diminished his utility. He
foresaw that besides being a tragedy, there would be a muddle;
already he saw several tiresome little knots, and each time his
eye returned to them, they were larger. Born in freedom, he was
not afraid of muddle, but he recognized its existence.

This section of the day concluded in a queer vague talk with
Professor Godbole. The interminable affair of the Russell’s Viper
was again in question. Some weeks before, one of the masters at
the College, an unpopular Parsi, had found a Russell’s Viper nosing
round his class-room. Perhaps it had crawled in of itself, but
perhaps it had not, and the staff still continued to interview
their Principal about it, and to take up his time with their
theories. The reptile is so poisonous that he did not like to cut
them short, and this they knew. Thus when his mind was bursting
with other troubles and he was debating whether he should compose
a letter of appeal to Miss Quested, he was obliged to listen to a
speech which lacked both basis and conclusion, and floated through
air. At the end of it Godbole said, “May I now take my leave?”—always
an indication that he had not come to his point yet. “Now I take
my leave, I must tell you how glad I am to hear that after all you
succeeded in reaching the Marabar. I feared my unpunctuality had
prevented you, but you went (a far pleasanter method) in Miss
Derek’s car. I hope the expedition was a successful one.”

“The news has not reached you yet, I can see.”

“Oh yes.”

“No; there has been a terrible catastrophe about Aziz.”

“Oh yes. That is all round the College.”

“Well, the expedition where that occurs can scarcely be called a
successful one,” said Fielding, with an amazed stare.

“I cannot say. I was not present.”

He stared again—a most useless operation, for no eye could see what
lay at the bottom of the Brahman’s mind, and yet he had a mind and
a heart too, and all his friends trusted him, without knowing why.
“I am most frightfully cut up,” he said.

“So I saw at once on entering your office. I must not detain you,
but I have a small private difficulty on which I want your help;
I am leaving your service shortly, as you know.”

“Yes, alas!”

“And am returning to my birthplace in Central India to take charge
of education there. I want to start a High School there on sound
English lines, that shall be as like Government College as
possible.”

“Well?” he sighed, trying to take an interest.

“At present there is only vernacular education at Mau. I shall feel
it my duty to change all that. I shall advise His Highness to
sanction at least a High School in the Capital, and if possible
another in each pargana.”

Fielding sunk his head on his arms; really, Indians were sometimes
unbearable.

“The point—the point on which I desire your help is this: what name
should be given to the school?”

“A name? A name for a school?” he said, feeling sickish suddenly,
as he had done in the waiting-room.

“Yes, a name, a suitable title, by which it can be called, by which
it may be generally known.”

“Really—I have no names for schools in my head. I can think of
nothing but our poor Aziz. Have you grasped that at the present
moment he is in prison?”

“Oh yes. Oh no, I do not expect an answer to my question now. I
only meant that when you are at leisure, you might think the matter
over, and suggest two or three alternative titles for schools. I
had thought of the ‘Mr. Fielding High School,’ but failing that,
the ‘King-Emperor George the Fifth.’”

“Godbole!”

The old fellow put his hands together, and looked sly and charming.

“Is Aziz innocent or guilty?”

“That is for the Court to decide. The verdict will be in strict
accordance with the evidence, I make no doubt.”

“Yes, yes, but your personal opinion. Here’s a man we both like,
generally esteemed; he lives here quietly doing his work. Well,
what’s one to make of it? Would he or would he not do such a
thing?”

“Ah, that is rather a different question from your previous one,
and also more difficult: I mean difficult in our philosophy. Dr.
Aziz is a most worthy young man, I have a great regard for him;
but I think you are asking me whether the individual can commit
good actions or evil actions, and that is rather difficult for us.”
He spoke without emotion and in short tripping syllables.

“I ask you: did he do it or not? Is that plain? I know he didn’t,
and from that I start. I mean to get at the true explanation in a
couple of days. My last notion is that it’s the guide who went
round with them. Malice on Miss Quested’s part—it couldn’t be that,
though Hamidullah thinks so. She has certainly had some appalling
experience. But you tell me, oh no—because good and evil are the
same.”

“No, not exactly, please, according to our philosophy. Because
nothing can be performed in isolation. All perform a good action,
when one is performed, and when an evil action is performed, all
perform it. To illustrate my meaning, let me take the case in point
as an example.

“I am informed that an evil action was performed in the Marabar
Hills, and that a highly esteemed English lady is now seriously
ill in consequence. My answer to that is this: that action was
performed by Dr. Aziz.” He stopped and sucked in his thin cheeks.
“It was performed by the guide.” He stopped again. “It was performed
by you.” Now he had an air of daring and of coyness. “It was
performed by me.” He looked shyly down the sleeve of his own coat.
“And by my students. It was even performed by the lady herself.
When evil occurs, it expresses the whole of the universe. Similarly
when good occurs.”

“And similarly when suffering occurs, and so on and so forth, and
everything is anything and nothing something,” he muttered in his
irritation, for he needed the solid ground.

“Excuse me, you are now again changing the basis of our discussion.
We were discussing good and evil. Suffering is merely a matter for
the individual. If a young lady has sunstroke, that is a matter of
no significance to the universe. Oh no, not at all. Oh no, not the
least. It is an isolated matter, it only concerns herself. If she
thought her head did not ache, she would not be ill, and that would
end it. But it is far otherwise in the case of good and evil. They
are not what we think them, they are what they are, and each of us
has contributed to both.”

“You’re preaching that evil and good are the same.”

“Oh no, excuse me once again. Good and evil are different, as their
names imply. But, in my own humble opinion, they are both of them
aspects of my Lord. He is present in the one, absent in the other,
and the difference between presence and absence is great, as great
as my feeble mind can grasp. Yet absence implies presence, absence
is not non-existence, and we are therefore entitled to repeat,
‘Come, come, come, come.’” And in the same breath, as if to cancel
any beauty his words might have contained, he added, “But did you
have time to visit any of the interesting Marabar antiquities?”

Fielding was silent, trying to meditate and rest his brain.

“Did you not even see the tank by the usual camping ground?” he
nagged.

“Yes, yes,” he answered distractedly, wandering over half a dozen
things at once.

“That is good, then you saw the Tank of the Dagger.” And he related
a legend which might have been acceptable if he had told it at the
tea-party a fortnight ago. It concerned a Hindu Rajah who had slain
his own sister’s son, and the dagger with which he performed the
deed remained clamped to his hand until in the course of years he
came to the Marabar Hills, where he was thirsty and wanted to drink
but saw a thirsty cow and ordered the water to be offered to her
first, which, when done, “dagger fell from his hand, and to
commemorate miracle he built Tank.” Professor Godbole’s conversations
frequently culminated in a cow. Fielding received this one in
gloomy silence.

In the afternoon he obtained a permit and saw Aziz, but found him
unapproachable through misery. “You deserted me,” was the only
coherent remark. He went away to write his letter to Miss Quested.
Even if it reached her, it would do no good, and probably the
McBrydes would withhold it. Miss Quested did pull him up short.
She was such a dry, sensible girl, and quite without malice: the
last person in Chandrapore wrongfully to accuse an Indian.




  CHAPTER XX


Although Miss Quested had not made herself popular with the English,
she brought out all that was fine in their character. For a few
hours an exalted emotion gushed forth, which the women felt even
more keenly than the men, if not for so long. “What can we do for
our sister?” was the only thought of Mesdames Callendar and Lesley,
as they drove through the pelting heat to enquire. Mrs. Turton was
the only visitor admitted to the sick-room. She came out ennobled
by an unselfish sorrow. “She is my own darling girl,” were the
words she spoke, and then, remembering that she had called her “not
pukka” and resented her engagement to young Heaslop, she began to
cry. No one had ever seen the Collector’s wife cry. Capable of
tears—yes, but always reserving them for some adequate occasion,
and now it had come. Ah, why had they not all been kinder to the
stranger, more patient, given her not only hospitality but their
hearts? The tender core of the heart that is so seldom used—they
employed it for a little, under the stimulus of remorse. If all is
over (as Major Callendar implied), well, all is over, and nothing
can be done, but they retained some responsibility in her grievous
wrong that they couldn’t define. If she wasn’t one of them, they
ought to have made her one, and they could never do that now, she
had passed beyond their invitation. “Why don’t one think more of
other people?” sighed pleasure-loving Miss Derek. These regrets
only lasted in their pure form for a few hours. Before sunset,
other considerations adulterated them, and the sense of guilt (so
strangely connected with our first sight of any suffering) had
begun to wear away.

People drove into the club with studious calm—the jog-trot of
country gentlefolk between green hedgerows, for the natives must
not suspect that they were agitated. They exchanged the usual
drinks, but everything tasted different, and then they looked out
at the palisade of cactuses stabbing the purple throat of the sky;
they realized that they were thousands of miles from any scenery
that they understood. The club was fuller than usual, and several
parents had brought their children into the rooms reserved for
adults, which gave the air of the Residency at Lucknow. One young
mother—a brainless but most beautiful girl—sat on a low ottoman in
the smoking-room with her baby in her arms; her husband was away
in the district, and she dared not return to her bungalow in case
the “niggers attacked.” The wife of a small railway official, she
was generally snubbed; but this evening, with her abundant figure
and masses of corn-gold hair, she symbolized all that is worth
fighting and dying for; more permanent a symbol, perhaps, than poor
Adela. “Don’t worry, Mrs. Blakiston, those drums are only Mohurram,”
the men would tell her.

“Then they’ve started,” she moaned, clasping the infant and rather
wishing he would not blow bubbles down his chin at such a moment
as this. “No, of course not, and anyhow, they’re not coming to the
club.” “And they’re not coming to the Burra Sahib’s bungalow
either, my dear, and that’s where you and your baby’ll sleep
tonight,” answered Mrs. Turton, towering by her side like Pallas
Athene, and determining in the future not to be such a snob.

The Collector clapped his hands for silence. He was much calmer
than when he had flown out at Fielding. He was indeed always calmer
when he addressed several people than in a _tête-à-tête._ “I want
to talk specially to the ladies,” he said. “Not the least cause
for alarm. Keep cool, keep cool. Don’t go out more than you can
help, don’t go into the city, don’t talk before your servants.
That’s all.”

“Harry, is there any news from the city?” asked his wife, standing
at some distance from him, and also assuming her public-safety
voice. The rest were silent during the august colloquy.

“Everything absolutely normal.”

“I had gathered as much. Those drums are merely Mohurram, of
course.”

“Merely the preparations for it—the Procession is not till next
week.”

“Quite so, not till Monday.”

“Mr. McBryde’s down there disguised as a Holy Man,” said Mrs.
Callendar.

“That’s exactly the sort of thing that must not be said,” he
remarked, pointing at her. “Mrs. Callendar, be more careful than
that, please, in these times.”

“I . . . well, I . . .” She was not offended, his severity made
her feel safe.

“Any more questions? Necessary questions.”

“Is the—where is he——” Mrs. Lesley quavered.

“Jail. Bail has been refused.”

Fielding spoke next. He wanted to know whether there was an official
bulletin about Miss Quested’s health, or whether the grave reports
were due to gossip. His question produced a bad effect, partly
because he had pronounced her name; she, like Aziz, was always
referred to by a periphrasis.

“I hope Callendar may be able to let us know how things are going
before long.”

“I fail to see how that last question can be termed a necessary
question,” said Mrs. Turton.

“Will all ladies leave the smoking-room now, please?” he cried,
clapping his hands again. “And remember what I have said. We look
to you to help us through a difficult time, and you can help us by
behaving as if everything is normal. It is all I ask. Can I rely
on you?”

“Yes, indeed, Burra Sahib,” they chorused out of peaked, anxious
faces. They moved out, subdued yet elated, Mrs. Blakiston in their
midst like a sacred flame. His simple words had reminded them that
they were an outpost of Empire. By the side of their compassionate
love for Adela another sentiment sprang up which was to strangle
it in the long run. Its first signs were prosaic and small. Mrs.
Turton made her loud, hard jokes at bridge, Mrs. Lesley began to
knit a comforter.

When the smoking-room was clear, the Collector sat on the edge of
a table, so that he could dominate without formality. His mind
whirled with contradictory impulses. He wanted to avenge Miss
Quested and punish Fielding, while remaining scrupulously fair. He
wanted to flog every native that he saw, but to do nothing that
would lead to a riot or to the necessity for military intervention.
The dread of having to call in the troops was vivid to him; soldiers
put one thing straight, but leave a dozen others crooked, and they
love to humiliate the civilian administration. One soldier was in
the room this evening—a stray subaltern from a Gurkha regiment; he
was a little drunk, and regarded his presence as providential. The
Collector sighed. There seemed nothing for it but the old weary
business of compromise and moderation. He longed for the good old
days when an Englishman could satisfy his own honour and no
questions asked afterwards. Poor young Heaslop had taken a step in
this direction, by refusing bail, but the Collector couldn’t feel
this was wise of poor young Heaslop. Not only would the Nawab
Bahadur and others be angry, but the Government of India itself
also watches—and behind it is that caucus of cranks and cravens,
the British Parliament. He had constantly to remind himself that,
in the eyes of the law, Aziz was not yet guilty, and the effort
fatigued him.

The others, less responsible, could behave naturally. They had
started speaking of “women and children”—that phrase that exempts
the male from sanity when it has been repeated a few times. Each
felt that all he loved best in the world was at stake, demanded
revenge, and was filled with a not unpleasing glow, in which the
chilly and half-known features of Miss Quested vanished, and were
replaced by all that is sweetest and warmest in the private life.
“But it’s the women and children,” they repeated, and the Collector
knew he ought to stop them intoxicating themselves, but he hadn’t
the heart. “They ought to be compelled to give hostages,” etc. Many
of the said women and children were leaving for the Hill Station
in a few days, and the suggestion was made that they should be
packed off at once in a special train.

“_And_ a jolly suggestion,” the subaltern cried. “The army’s got
to come in sooner or later. (A special train was in his mind
inseparable from troops.) This would never have happened if Barabas
Hill was under military control. Station a bunch of Gurkhas at the
entrance of the cave was all that was wanted.”

“Mrs. Blakiston was saying if only there were a few Tommies,”
remarked someone.

“English no good,” he cried, getting his loyalties mixed. “Native
troops for this country. Give me the sporting type of native, give
me Gurkhas, give me Rajputs, give me Jats, give me the Punjabi,
give me Sikhs, give me Marathas, Bhils, Afridis and Pathans, and
really if it comes to that, I don’t mind if you give me the scums
of the bazaars. Properly led, mind. I’d lead them anywhere——”

The Collector nodded at him pleasantly, and said to his own people:
“Don’t start carrying arms about. I want everything to go on
precisely as usual, until there’s cause for the contrary. Get the
womenfolk off to the hills, but do it quietly, and for Heaven’s
sake no more talk of special trains. Never mind what you think or
feel. Possibly I have feelings too. One isolated Indian has
attempted—is charged with an attempted crime.” He flipped his
forehead hard with his finger-nail, and they all realized that he
felt as deeply as they did, and they loved him, and determined not
to increase his difficulties. “Act upon that fact until there are
more facts,” he concluded. “Assume every Indian is an angel.”

They murmured, “Right you are, Burra Sahib. . . . Angels. . . .
Exactly. . . .” From the subaltern: “Exactly what I said. The
native’s all right if you get him alone. Lesley! Lesley! You
remember the one I had a knock with on your Maidan last month.
Well, he was all right. Any native who plays polo is all right.
What you’ve got to stamp on is these educated classes, and, mind,
I do know what I’m talking about this time.”

The smoking-room door opened, and let in a feminine buzz. Mrs.
Turton called out, “She’s better,” and from both sections of the
community a sigh of joy and relief rose. The Civil Surgeon, who
had brought the good news, came in. His cumbrous, pasty face looked
ill-tempered. He surveyed the company, saw Fielding crouched below
him on an ottoman, and said, “H’m!”

Everyone began pressing him for details. “No one’s out of danger
in this country as long as they have a temperature,” was his
answer. He appeared to resent his patient’s recovery, and no one
who knew the old Major and his ways was surprised at this.

“Squat down, Callendar; tell us all about it.”

“Take me some time to do that.”

“How’s the old lady?”

“Temperature.”

“My wife heard she was sinking.”

“So she may be. I guarantee nothing. I really can’t be plagued with
questions, Lesley.”

“Sorry, old man.”

“Heaslop’s just behind me.”

At the name of Heaslop a fine and beautiful expression was renewed
on every face. Miss Quested was only a victim, but young Heaslop
was a martyr; he was the recipient of all the evil intended against
them by the country they had tried to serve; he was bearing the
sahib’s cross. And they fretted because they could do nothing for
him in return; they felt so craven sitting on softness and attending
the course of the law.

“I wish to God I hadn’t given my jewel of an assistant leave. I’ld
cut my tongue out first. To feel I’m responsible, that’s what hits
me. To refuse, and then give in under pressure. That is what I did,
my sons, that is what I did.”

Fielding took his pipe from his mouth and looked at it thoughtfully.
Thinking him afraid, the other went on: “I understood an Englishman
was to accompany the expedition. That is why I gave in.”

“No one blames you, my dear Callendar,” said the Collector, looking
down. “We are all to blame in the sense that we ought to have seen
the expedition was insufficiently guaranteed, and stopped it. I
knew about it myself; we lent our car this morning to take the
ladies to the station. We are all implicated in that sense, but
not an atom of blame attaches to you personally.”

“I don’t feel that. I wish I could. Responsibility is a very awful
thing, and I’ve no use for the man who shirks it.” His eyes were
directed on Fielding. Those who knew that Fielding had undertaken
to accompany and missed the early train were sorry for him; it was
what is to be expected when a man mixes himself up with natives;
always ends in some indignity. The Collector, who knew more, kept
silent, for the official in him still hoped that Fielding would
toe the line. The conversation turned to women and children again,
and under its cover Major Callendar got hold of the subaltern, and
set him on to bait the schoolmaster. Pretending to be more drunk
than he really was, he began to make semi-offensive remarks.

“Heard about Miss Quested’s servant?” reinforced the Major.

“No, what about him?”

“Heaslop warned Miss Quested’s servant last night never to lose
sight of her. Prisoner got hold of this and managed to leave him
behind. Bribed him. Heaslop has just found out the whole story,
with names and sums—a well-known pimp to those people gave the
money, Mohammed Latif by name. So much for the servant. What about
the Englishman—our friend here? How did they get rid of him? Money
again.”

Fielding rose to his feet, supported by murmurs and exclamations,
for no one yet suspected his integrity.

“Oh, I’m being misunderstood, apologies,” said the Major offensively.
“I didn’t mean they bribed Mr. Fielding.”

“Then what do you mean?”

“They paid the other Indian to make you late—Godbole. He was saying
his prayers. I know those prayers!”

“That’s ridiculous . . .” He sat down again, trembling with rage;
person after person was being dragged into the mud.

Having shot this bolt, the Major prepared the next. “Heaslop also
found out something from his mother. Aziz paid a herd of natives
to suffocate her in a cave. That was the end of her, or would have
been only she got out. Nicely planned, wasn’t it? Neat. Then he
could go on with the girl. He and she and a guide, provided by the
same Mohammed Latif. Guide now can’t be found. Pretty.” His voice
broke into a roar. “It’s not the time for sitting down. It’s the
time for action. Call in the troops and clear the bazaars.”

The Major’s outbursts were always discounted, but he made everyone
uneasy on this occasion. The crime was even worse than they had
supposed—the unspeakable limit of cynicism, untouched since 1857.
Fielding forgot his anger on poor old Godbole’s behalf, and became
thoughtful; the evil was propagating in every direction, it seemed
to have an existence of its own, apart from anything that was done
or said by individuals, and he understood better why both Aziz and
Hamidullah had been inclined to lie down and die. His adversary
saw that he was in trouble, and now ventured to say, “I suppose
nothing that’s said inside the club will go outside the club?”
winking the while at Lesley.

“Why should it?” responded Lesley.

“Oh, nothing. I only heard a rumour that a certain member here
present has been seeing the prisoner this afternoon. You can’t run
with the hare and hunt with the hounds, at least not in this
country.”

“Does anyone here present want to?”

Fielding was determined not to be drawn again. He had something to
say, but it should be at his own moment. The attack failed to
mature, because the Collector did not support it. Attention shifted
from him for a time. Then the buzz of women broke out again. The
door had been opened by Ronny.

The young man looked exhausted and tragic, also gentler than usual.
He always showed deference to his superiors, but now it came
straight from his heart. He seemed to appeal for their protection
in the insult that had befallen him, and they, in instinctive
homage, rose to their feet. But every human act in the East is
tainted with officialism, and while honouring him they condemned
Aziz and India. Fielding realized this, and he remained seated. It
was an ungracious, a caddish thing to do, perhaps an unsound thing
to do, but he felt he had been passive long enough, and that he
might be drawn into the wrong current if he did not make a stand.
Ronny, who had not seen him, said in husky tones, “Oh please—please
all sit down, I only want to listen what has been decided.”

“Heaslop, I’m telling them I’m against any show of force,” said
the Collector apologetically. “I don’t know whether you will feel
as I do, but that is how I am situated. When the verdict is
obtained, it will be another matter.”

“You are sure to know best; I have no experience, Burra Sahib.”

“How is your mother, old boy?”

“Better, thank you. I wish everyone would sit down.”

“Some have never got up,” the young soldier said.

“And the Major brings us an excellent report of Miss Quested,”
Turton went on.

“I do, I do, I’m satisfied.”

“You thought badly of her earlier, did you not, Major? That’s why
I refused bail.”

Callendar laughed with friendly inwardness, and said, “Heaslop,
Heaslop, next time bail’s wanted, ring up the old doctor before
giving it; his shoulders are broad, and, speaking in the strictest
confidence, don’t take the old doctor’s opinion too seriously. He’s
a blithering idiot, we can always leave it at that, but he’ll do
the little he can towards keeping in quod the——” He broke off with
affected politeness. “Oh, but he has one of his friends here.”

The subaltern called, “Stand up, you swine.”

“Mr. Fielding, what has prevented you from standing up?” said the
Collector, entering the fray at last. It was the attack for which
Fielding had waited, and to which he must reply.

“May I make a statement, sir?”

“Certainly.”

Seasoned and self-contained, devoid of the fervours of nationality
or youth, the schoolmaster did what was for him a comparatively
easy thing. He stood up and said, “I believe Dr. Aziz to be
innocent.”

“You have a right to hold that opinion if you choose, but pray is
that any reason why you should insult Mr. Heaslop?”

“May I conclude my statement?”

“Certainly.”

“I am waiting for the verdict of the courts. If he is guilty I
resign from my service, and leave India. I resign from the club
now.”

“Hear, hear!” said voices, not entirely hostile, for they liked
the fellow for speaking out.

“You have not answered my question. Why did you not stand when Mr.
Heaslop entered?”

“With all deference, sir, I am not here to answer questions, but
to make a personal statement, and I have concluded it.”

“May I ask whether you have taken over charge of this District?”

Fielding moved towards the door.

“One moment, Mr. Fielding. You are not to go yet, please. Before
you leave the club, from which you do very well to resign, you will
express some detestation of the crime, and you will apologize to
Mr. Heaslop.”

“Are you speaking to me officially, sir?”

The Collector, who never spoke otherwise, was so infuriated that
he lost his head. He cried, “Leave this room at once, and I deeply
regret that I demeaned myself to meet you at the station. You have
sunk to the level of your associates; you are weak, weak, that is
what is wrong with you——”

“I want to leave the room, but cannot while this gentleman prevents
me,” said Fielding lightly; the subaltern had got across his path.

“Let him go,” said Ronny, almost in tears.

It was the only appeal that could have saved the situation. Whatever
Heaslop wished must be done. There was a slight scuffle at the
door, from which Fielding was propelled, a little more quickly than
is natural, into the room where the ladies were playing cards.
“Fancy if I’d fallen or got angry,” he thought. Of course he was
a little angry. His peers had never offered him violence or called
him weak before, besides Heaslop had heaped coals of fire on his
head. He wished he had not picked the quarrel over poor suffering
Heaslop, when there were cleaner issues at hand.

However, there it was, done, muddled through, and to cool himself
and regain mental balance he went on to the upper verandah for a
moment, where the first object he saw was the Marabar Hills. At
this distance and hour they leapt into beauty; they were Monsalvat,
Walhalla, the towers of a cathedral, peopled with saints and
heroes, and covered with flowers. What miscreant lurked in them,
presently to be detected by the activities of the law? Who was the
guide, and had he been found yet? What was the “echo” of which the
girl complained? He did not know, but presently he would know.
Great is information, and she shall prevail. It was the last moment
of the light, and as he gazed at the Marabar Hills they seemed to
move graciously towards him like a queen, and their charm became
the sky’s. At the moment they vanished they were everywhere, the
cool benediction of the night descended, the stars sparkled, and
the whole universe was a hill. Lovely, exquisite moment—but passing
the Englishman with averted face and on swift wings. He experienced
nothing himself; it was as if someone had told him there was such
a moment, and he was obliged to believe. And he felt dubious and
discontented suddenly, and wondered whether he was really and truly
successful as a human being. After forty years’ experience, he had
learnt to manage his life and make the best of it on advanced
European lines, had developed his personality, explored his
limitations, controlled his passions—and he had done it all without
becoming either pedantic or worldly. A creditable achievement, but
as the moment passed, he felt he ought to have been working at
something else the whole time,—he didn’t know at what, never would
know, never could know, and that was why he felt sad.




  CHAPTER XXI


Dismissing his regrets, as inappropriate to the matter in hand, he
accomplished the last section of the day by riding off to his new
allies. He was glad that he had broken with the club, for he would
have picked up scraps of gossip there, and reported them down in
the city, and he was glad to be denied this opportunity. He would
miss his billiards, and occasional tennis, and cracks with McBryde,
but really that was all, so light did he travel. At the entrance
of the bazaars, a tiger made his horse shy—a youth dressed up as
a tiger, the body striped brown and yellow, a mask over the face.
Mohurram was working up. The city beat a good many drums, but
seemed good-tempered. He was invited to inspect a small tazia—a
flimsy and frivolous erection, more like a crinoline than the tomb
of the grandson of the Prophet, done to death at Kerbela. Excited
children were pasting coloured paper over its ribs. The rest of
the evening he spent with the Nawab Bahadur, Hamidullah, Mahmoud
Ali, and others of the confederacy. The campaign was also working
up. A telegram had been sent to the famous Amritrao, and his
acceptance received. Application for bail was to be renewed—it
could not well be withheld now that Miss Quested was out of danger.
The conference was serious and sensible, but marred by a group of
itinerant musicians, who were allowed to play in the compound. Each
held a large earthenware jar, containing pebbles, and jerked it up
and down in time to a doleful chant. Distracted by the noise, he
suggested their dismissal, but the Nawab Bahadur vetoed it; he said
that musicians, who had walked many miles, might bring good luck.

Late at night, he had an inclination to tell Professor Godbole of
the tactical and moral error he had made in being rude to Heaslop,
and to hear what he would say. But the old fellow had gone to bed,
and slipped off unmolested to his new job in a day or two: he
always did possess the knack of slipping off.




  CHAPTER XXII


Adela lay for several days in the McBrydes’ bungalow. She had been
touched by the sun, also hundreds of cactus spines had to be picked
out of her flesh. Hour after hour Miss Derek and Mrs. McBryde
examined her through magnifying glasses, always coming on fresh
colonies, tiny hairs that might snap off and be drawn into the
blood if they were neglected. She lay passive beneath their fingers,
which developed the shock that had begun in the cave. Hitherto she
had not much minded whether she was touched or not: her senses were
abnormally inert and the only contact she anticipated was that of
mind. Everything now was transferred to the surface of her body,
which began to avenge itself, and feed unhealthily. People seemed
very much alike, except that some would come close while others
kept away. “In space things touch, in time things part,” she
repeated to herself while the thorns were being extracted—her brain
so weak that she could not decide whether the phrase was a
philosophy or a pun.

They were kind to her, indeed over-kind, the men too respectful,
the women too sympathetic; whereas Mrs. Moore, the only visitor
she wanted, kept away. No one understood her trouble, or knew why
she vibrated between hard commonsense and hysteria. She would begin
a speech as if nothing particular had happened. “I went into this
detestable cave,” she would say dryly, “and I remember scratching
the wall with my finger-nail, to start the usual echo, and then as
I was saying there was this shadow, or sort of shadow, down the
entrance tunnel, bottling me up. It seemed like an age, but I
suppose the whole thing can’t have lasted thirty seconds really.
I hit at him with the glasses, he pulled me round the cave by the
strap, it broke, I escaped, that’s all. He never actually touched
me once. It all seems such nonsense.” Then her eyes would fill with
tears. “Naturally I’m upset, but I shall get over it.” And then
she would break down entirely, and the women would feel she was
one of themselves and cry too, and men in the next room murmur:
“Good God, good God!” No one realized that she thought tears vile,
a degradation more subtle than anything endured in the Marabar, a
negation of her advanced outlook and the natural honesty of her
mind. Adela was always trying to “think the incident out,” always
reminding herself that no harm had been done. There was “the
shock,” but what is that? For a time her own logic would convince
her, then she would hear the echo again, weep, declare she was
unworthy of Ronny, and hope her assailant would get the maximum
penalty. After one of these bouts, she longed to go out into the
bazaars and ask pardon from everyone she met, for she felt in some
vague way that she was leaving the world worse than she found it.
She felt that it was her crime, until the intellect, reawakening,
pointed out to her that she was inaccurate here, and set her again
upon her sterile round.

If only she could have seen Mrs. Moore! The old lady had not been
well either, and was disinclined to come out, Ronny reported. And
consequently the echo flourished, raging up and down like a nerve
in the faculty of her hearing, and the noise in the cave, so
unimportant intellectually, was prolonged over the surface of her
life. She had struck the polished wall—for no reason—and before
the comment had died away, he followed her, and the climax was the
falling of her field-glasses. The sound had spouted after her when
she escaped, and was going on still like a river that gradually
floods the plain. Only Mrs. Moore could drive it back to its source
and seal the broken reservoir. Evil was loose . . . she could even
hear it entering the lives of others. . . . And Adela spent days
in this atmosphere of grief and depression. Her friends kept up
their spirits by demanding holocausts of natives, but she was too
worried and weak to do that.

When the cactus thorns had all been extracted, and her temperature
fallen to normal, Ronny came to fetch her away. He was worn with
indignation and suffering, and she wished she could comfort him;
but intimacy seemed to caricature itself, and the more they spoke
the more wretched and self-conscious they became. Practical talk
was the least painful, and he and McBryde now told her one or two
things which they had concealed from her during the crisis, by the
doctor’s orders. She learnt for the first time of the Mohurram
troubles. There had nearly been a riot. The last day of the
festival, the great procession left its official route, and tried
to enter the civil station, and a telephone had been cut because
it interrupted the advance of one of the larger paper towers.
McBryde and his police had pulled the thing straight—a fine piece
of work. They passed on to another and very painful subject: the
trial. She would have to appear in court, identify the prisoner,
and submit to cross-examination by an Indian lawyer.

“Can Mrs. Moore be with me?” was all she said.

“Certainly, and I shall be there myself,” Ronny replied. “The case
won’t come before me; they’ve objected to me on personal grounds.
It will be at Chandrapore—we thought at one time it would be
transferred elsewhere.”

“Miss Quested realizes what all that means, though,” said McBryde
sadly. “The case will come before Das.”

Das was Ronny’s assistant—own brother to the Mrs. Bhattacharya
whose carriage had played them false last month. He was courteous
and intelligent, and with the evidence before him could only come
to one conclusion; but that he should be judge over an English girl
had convulsed the station with wrath, and some of the women had
sent a telegram about it to Lady Mellanby, the wife of the
Lieutenant-Governor.

“I must come before someone.”

“That’s—that’s the way to face it. You have the pluck, Miss
Quested.” He grew very bitter over the arrangements, and called
them “the fruits of democracy.” In the old days an Englishwoman
would not have had to appear, nor would any Indian have dared to
discuss her private affairs. She would have made her deposition,
and judgment would have followed. He apologized to her for the
condition of the country, with the result that she gave one of her
sudden little shoots of tears. Ronny wandered miserably about the
room while she cried, treading upon the flowers of the Kashmir
carpet that so inevitably covered it or drumming on the brass
Benares bowls. “I do this less every day, I shall soon be quite
well,” she said, blowing her nose and feeling hideous.

“What I need is something to do. That is why I keep on with this
ridiculous crying.”

“It’s not ridiculous, we think you wonderful,” said the policeman
very sincerely. “It only bothers us that we can’t help you more.
Your stopping here—at such a time—is the greatest honour this
house——” He too was overcome with emotion. “By the way, a letter
came here for you while you were ill,” he continued. “I opened it,
which is a strange confession to make. Will you forgive me? The
circumstances are peculiar. It is from Fielding.”

“Why should he write to me?”

“A most lamentable thing has happened. The defence got hold of
him.”

“He’s a crank, a crank,” said Ronny lightly.

“That’s your way of putting it, but a man can be a crank without
being a cad. Miss Quested had better know how he behaved to you.
If you don’t tell her, somebody else will.” He told her. “He is
now the mainstay of the defence, I needn’t add. He is the one
righteous Englishman in a horde of tyrants. He receives deputations
from the bazaar, and they all chew betel nut and smear one another’s
hands with scent. It is not easy to enter into the mind of such a
man. His students are on strike—out of enthusiasm for him they
won’t learn their lessons. If it weren’t for Fielding one would
never have had the Mohurram trouble. He has done a very grave
disservice to the whole community. The letter lay here a day or
two, waiting till you were well enough, then the situation got so
grave that I decided to open it in case it was useful to us.”

“Is it?” she said feebly.

“Not at all. He only has the impertinence to suggest you have made
a mistake.”

“Would that I had!” She glanced through the letter, which was
careful and formal in its wording. “Dr. Aziz is innocent,” she
read. Then her voice began to tremble again. “But think of his
behaviour to you, Ronny. When you had already to bear so much for
my sake! It was shocking of him. My dear, how can I repay you? How
can one repay when one has nothing to give? What is the use of
personal relationships when everyone brings less and less to them?
I feel we ought all to go back into the desert for centuries and
try and get good. I want to begin at the beginning. All the things
I thought I’d learnt are just a hindrance, they’re not knowledge
at all. I’m not fit for personal relationships. Well, let’s go,
let’s go. Of course Mr. Fielding’s letter doesn’t count; he can
think and write what he likes, only he shouldn’t have been rude to
you when you had so much to bear. That’s what matters. . . . I
don’t want your arm, I’m a magnificent walker, so don’t touch me,
please.”

Mrs. McBryde wished her an affectionate good-bye—a woman with whom
she had nothing in common and whose intimacy oppressed her. They
would have to meet now, year after year, until one of their husbands
was superannuated. Truly Anglo-India had caught her with a
vengeance, and perhaps it served her right for having tried to take
up a line of her own. Humbled yet repelled, she gave thanks. “Oh,
we must help one another, we must take the rough with the smooth,”
said Mrs. McBryde. Miss Derek was there too, still making jokes
about her comic Maharajah and Rani. Required as a witness at the
trial, she had refused to send back the Mudkul car; they would be
frightfully sick. Both Mrs. McBryde and Miss Derek kissed her, and
called her by her Christian name. Then Ronny drove her back. It
was early in the morning, for the day, as the hot weather advanced,
swelled like a monster at both ends, and left less and less room
for the movements of mortals.

As they neared his bungalow, he said: “Mother’s looking forward to
seeing you, but of course she’s old, one mustn’t forget that. Old
people never take things as one expects, in my opinion.” He seemed
warning her against approaching disappointment, but she took no
notice. Her friendship with Mrs. Moore was so deep and real that
she felt sure it would last, whatever else happened. “What can I
do to make things easier for you? it’s you who matter,” she sighed.

“Dear old girl to say so.”

“Dear old boy.” Then she cried: “Ronny, she isn’t ill too?”

He reassured her; Major Callendar was not dissatisfied.

“But you’ll find her—irritable. We are an irritable family. Well,
you’ll see for yourself. No doubt my own nerves are out of order,
and I expected more from mother when I came in from the office than
she felt able to give. She is sure to make a special effort for
you; still, I don’t want your home-coming to be a disappointing
one. Don’t expect too much.”

The house came in sight. It was a replica of the bungalow she had
left. Puffy, red, and curiously severe, Mrs. Moore was revealed
upon a sofa. She didn’t get up when they entered, and the surprise
of this roused Adela from her own troubles.

“Here you are both back,” was the only greeting.

Adela sat down and took her hand. It withdrew, and she felt that
just as others repelled her, so did she repel Mrs. Moore.

“Are you all right? You appeared all right when I left,” said
Ronny, trying not to speak crossly, but he had instructed her to
give the girl a pleasant welcome, and he could not but feel annoyed.

“I am all right,” she said heavily. “As a matter of fact I have
been looking at my return ticket. It is interchangeable, so I have
a much larger choice of boats home than I thought.”

“We can go into that later, can’t we?”

“Ralph and Stella may be wanting to know when I arrive.”

“There is plenty of time for all such plans. How do you think our
Adela looks?”

“I am counting on you to help me through; it is such a blessing to
be with you again, everyone else is a stranger,” said the girl
rapidly.

But Mrs. Moore showed no inclination to be helpful. A sort of
resentment emanated from her. She seemed to say: “Am I to be
bothered for ever?” Her Christian tenderness had gone, or had
developed into a hardness, a just irritation against the human
race; she had taken no interest at the arrest, asked scarcely any
questions, and had refused to leave her bed on the awful last night
of Mohurram, when an attack was expected on the bungalow.

“I know it’s all nothing; I must be sensible, I do try——” Adela
continued, working again towards tears.

“I shouldn’t mind if it had happened anywhere else; at least I
really don’t know where it did happen.”

Ronny supposed that he understood what she meant: she could not
identify or describe the particular cave, indeed almost refused to
have her mind cleared up about it, and it was recognized that the
defence would try to make capital out of this during the trial. He
reassured her: the Marabar caves were notoriously like one another;
indeed, in the future they were to be numbered in sequence with
white paint.

“Yes, I mean that, at least not exactly; but there is this echo
that I keep on hearing.”

“Oh, what of the echo?” asked Mrs. Moore, paying attention to her
for the first time.

“I can’t get rid of it.”

“I don’t suppose you ever will.”

Ronny had emphasized to his mother that Adela would arrive in a
morbid state, yet she was being positively malicious.

“Mrs. Moore, what is this echo?”

“Don’t you know?”

“No—what is it? oh, do say! I felt you would be able to explain it
. . . this will comfort me so. . . .”

“If you don’t know, you don’t know; I can’t tell you.”

“I think you’re rather unkind not to say.”

“Say, say, say,” said the old lady bitterly. “As if anything can
be said! I have spent my life in saying or in listening to sayings;
I have listened too much. It is time I was left in peace. Not to
die,” she added sourly. “No doubt you expect me to die, but when
I have seen you and Ronny married, and seen the other two and
whether they want to be married—I’ll retire then into a cave of my
own.” She smiled, to bring down her remark into ordinary life and
thus add to its bitterness. “Somewhere where no young people will
come asking questions and expecting answers. Some shelf.”

“Quite so, but meantime a trial is coming on,” said her son hotly,
“and the notion of most of us is that we’d better pull together
and help one another through, instead of being disagreeable. Are
you going to talk like that in the witness-box?”

“Why should I be in the witness-box?”

“To confirm certain points in our evidence.”

“I have nothing to do with your ludicrous law courts,” she said,
angry. “I will not be dragged in at all.”

“I won’t have her dragged in, either; I won’t have any more trouble
on my account,” cried Adela, and again took the hand, which was
again withdrawn. “Her evidence is not the least essential.”

“I thought she would want to give it. No one blames you, mother,
but the fact remains that you dropped off at the first cave, and
encouraged Adela to go on with him alone, whereas if you’d been
well enough to keep on too nothing would have happened. He planned
it, I know. Still, you fell into his trap just like Fielding and
Antony before you. . . . Forgive me for speaking so plainly, but
you’ve no right to take up this high and mighty attitude about law
courts. If you’re ill, that’s different; but you say you’re all
right and you seem so, in which case I thought you’ld want to take
your part, I did really.”

“I’ll not have you worry her whether she’s well or ill,” said
Adela, leaving the sofa and taking his arm; then dropped it with
a sigh and sat down again. But he was pleased she had rallied to
him and surveyed his mother patronizingly. He had never felt easy
with her. She was by no means the dear old lady outsiders supposed,
and India had brought her into the open.

“I shall attend your marriage, but not your trial,” she informed
them, tapping her knee; she had become very restless, and rather
ungraceful. “Then I shall go to England.”

“You can’t go to England in May, as you agreed.”

“I have changed my mind.”

“Well, we’d better end this unexpected wrangle,” said the young
man, striding about. “You appear to want to be left out of
everything, and that’s enough.”

“My body, my miserable body,” she sighed. “Why isn’t it strong?
Oh, why can’t I walk away and be gone? Why can’t I finish my duties
and be gone? Why do I get headaches and puff when I walk? And all
the time this to do and that to do and this to do in your way and
that to do in her way, and everything sympathy and confusion and
bearing one another’s burdens. Why can’t this be done and that be
done in my way and they be done and I at peace? Why has anything
to be done, I cannot see. Why all this marriage, marriage? . . .
The human race would have become a single person centuries ago if
marriage was any use. And all this rubbish about love, love in a
church, love in a cave, as if there is the least difference, and
I held up from my business over such trifles!”

“What do you want?” he said, exasperated. “Can you state it in
simple language? If so, do.”

“I want my pack of patience cards.”

“Very well, get them.”

He found, as he expected, that the poor girl was crying. And, as
always, an Indian close outside the window, a mali in this case,
picking up sounds. Much upset, he sat silent for a moment, thinking
over his mother and her senile intrusions. He wished he had never
asked her to visit India, or become under any obligation to her.

“Well, my dear girl, this isn’t much of a home-coming,” he said at
last. “I had no idea she had this up her sleeve.”

Adela had stopped crying. An extraordinary expression was on her
face, half relief, half horror. She repeated, “Aziz, Aziz.”

They all avoided mentioning that name. It had become synonymous
with the power of evil. He was “the prisoner,” “the person in
question,” “the defence,” and the sound of it now rang out like
the first note of new symphony.

“Aziz . . . have I made a mistake?”

“You’re over-tired,” he cried, not much surprised.

“Ronny, he’s innocent; I made an awful mistake.”

“Well, sit down anyhow.” He looked round the room, but only two
sparrows were chasing one another. She obeyed and took hold of his
hand. He stroked it and she smiled, and gasped as if she had risen
to the surface of the water, then touched her ear.

“My echo’s better.”

“That’s good. You’ll be perfectly well in a few days, but you must
save yourself up for the trial. Das is a very good fellow, we shall
all be with you.”

“But Ronny, dear Ronny, perhaps there oughtn’t to be any trial.”

“I don’t quite know what you’re saying, and I don’t think you do.”

“If Dr. Aziz never did it he ought to be let out.”

A shiver like impending death passed over Ronny. He said hurriedly,
“He was let out—until the Mohurram riot, when he had to be put in
again.” To divert her, he told her the story, which was held to be
amusing. Nureddin had stolen the Nawab Bahadur’s car and driven
Aziz into a ditch in the dark. Both of them had fallen out, and
Nureddin had cut his face open. Their wailing had been drowned by
the cries of the faithful, and it was quite a time before they were
rescued by the police. Nureddin was taken to the Minto Hospital,
Aziz restored to prison, with an additional charge against him of
disturbing the public peace. “Half a minute,” he remarked when the
anecdote was over, and went to the telephone to ask Callendar to
look in as soon as he found it convenient, because she hadn’t borne
the journey well.

When he returned, she was in a nervous crisis, but it took a
different form—she clung to him, and sobbed, “Help me to do what
I ought. Aziz is good. You heard your mother say so.”

“Heard what?”

“He’s good; I’ve been so wrong to accuse him.”

“Mother never said so.”

“Didn’t she?” she asked, quite reasonable, open to every suggestion
anyway.

“She never mentioned that name once.”

“But, Ronny, I heard her.”

“Pure illusion. You can’t be quite well, can you, to make up a
thing like that.”

“I suppose I can’t. How amazing of me!”

“I was listening to all she said, as far as it could be listened
to; she gets very incoherent.”

“When her voice dropped she said it—towards the end, when she
talked about love—love—I couldn’t follow, but just then she said:
‘Doctor Aziz never did it.’”

“Those words?”

“The idea more than the words.”

“Never, never, my dear girl. Complete illusion. His name was not
mentioned by anyone. Look here—you are confusing this with
Fielding’s letter.”

“That’s it, that’s it,” she cried, greatly relieved. “I knew I’d
heard his name somewhere. I am so grateful to you for clearing this
up—it’s the sort of mistake that worries me, and proves I’m
neurotic.”

“So you won’t go saying he’s innocent again, will you? for every
servant I’ve got is a spy.” He went to the window. The mali had
gone, or rather had turned into two small children—impossible they
should know English, but he sent them packing. “They all hate us,”
he explained. “It’ll be all right after the verdict, for I will
say this for them, they do accept the accomplished fact; but at
present they’re pouring out money like water to catch us tripping,
and a remark like yours is the very thing they look out for. It
would enable them to say it was a put-up job on the part of us
officials. You see what I mean.”

Mrs. Moore came back, with the same air of ill-temper, and sat down
with a flump by the card-table. To clear the confusion up, Ronny
asked her point-blank whether she had mentioned the prisoner. She
could not understand the question and the reason of it had to be
explained. She replied: “I never said his name,” and began to play
patience.

“I thought you said, ‘Aziz is an innocent man,’ but it was in Mr.
Fielding’s letter.”

“Of course he is innocent,” she answered indifferently: it was the
first time she had expressed an opinion on the point.

“You see, Ronny, I was right,” said the girl.

“You were not right, she never said it.”

“But she thinks it.”

“Who cares what she thinks?”

“Red nine on black ten——” from the card-table.

“She can think, and Fielding too, but there’s such a thing as
evidence, I suppose.”

“I know, but——”

“Is it again my duty to talk?” asked Mrs. Moore, looking up.
“Apparently, as you keep interrupting me.”

“Only if you have anything sensible to say.”

“Oh, how tedious . . . trivial . . .” and as when she had scoffed
at love, love, love, her mind seemed to move towards them from a
great distance and out of darkness. “Oh, why is everything still
my duty? when shall I be free from your fuss? Was he in the cave
and were you in the cave and on and on . . . and Unto us a Son is
born, unto us a Child is given . . . and am I good and is he bad
and are we saved? . . . and ending everything the echo.”

“I don’t hear it so much,” said Adela, moving towards her. “You
send it away, you do nothing but good, you are so good.”

“I am not good, no, bad.” She spoke more calmly and resumed her
cards, saying as she turned them up, “A bad old woman, bad, bad,
detestable. I used to be good with the children growing up, also
I meet this young man in his mosque, I wanted him to be happy.
Good, happy, small people. They do not exist, they were a dream.
. . . But I will not help you to torture him for what he never did.
There are different ways of evil and I prefer mine to yours.”

“Have you any evidence in the prisoner’s favour?” said Ronny in
the tones of the just official. “If so, it is your bounden duty to
go into the witness-box for him instead of for us. No one will stop
you.”

“One knows people’s characters, as you call them,” she retorted
disdainfully, as if she really knew more than character but could
not impart it. “I have heard both English and Indians speak well
of him, and I felt it isn’t the sort of thing he would do.”

“Feeble, mother, feeble.”

“Most feeble.”

“And most inconsiderate to Adela.”

Adela said: “It would be so appalling if I was wrong. I should take
my own life.”

He turned on her with: “What was I warning you just now? You know
you’re right, and the whole station knows it.”

“Yes, he . . . This is very, very awful. I’m as certain as ever he
followed me . . . only, wouldn’t it be possible to withdraw the
case? I dread the idea of giving evidence more and more, and you
are all so good to women here and you have so much more power than
in England—look at Miss Derek’s motor-car. Oh, of course it’s out
of the question, I’m ashamed to have mentioned it; please forgive
me.”

“That’s all right,” he said inadequately. “Of course I forgive you,
as you call it. But the case has to come before a magistrate now;
it really must, the machinery has started.”

“She has started the machinery; it will work to its end.”

Adela inclined towards tears in consequence of this unkind remark,
and Ronny picked up the list of steamship sailings with an excellent
notion in his head. His mother ought to leave India at once: she
was doing no good to herself or to anyone else there.




  CHAPTER XXIII


Lady Mellanby, wife to the Lieutenant-Governor of the Province,
had been gratified by the appeal addressed to her by the ladies of
Chandrapore. She could not do anything—besides, she was sailing
for England; but she desired to be informed if she could show
sympathy in any other way. Mrs. Turton replied that Mr. Heaslop’s
mother was trying to get a passage, but had delayed too long, and
all the boats were full; could Lady Mellanby use her influence?
Not even Lady Mellanby could expand the dimensions of a P. and O.,
but she was a very, very nice woman, and she actually wired offering
the unknown and obscure old lady accommodation in her own reserved
cabin. It was like a gift from heaven; humble and grateful, Ronny
could not but reflect that there are compensations for every woe.
His name was familiar at Government House owing to poor Adela, and
now Mrs. Moore would stamp it on Lady Mellanby’s imagination, as
they journeyed across the Indian Ocean and up the Red Sea. He had
a return of tenderness for his mother—as we do for our relatives
when they receive conspicuous and unexpected honour. She was not
negligible, she could still arrest the attention of a high
official’s wife.

So Mrs. Moore had all she wished; she escaped the trial, the
marriage, and the hot weather; she would return to England in
comfort and distinction, and see her other children. At her son’s
suggestion, and by her own desire, she departed. But she accepted
her good luck without enthusiasm. She had come to that state where
the horror of the universe and its smallness are both visible at
the same time—the twilight of the double vision in which so many
elderly people are involved. If this world is not to our taste,
well, at all events there is Heaven, Hell, Annihilation—one or
other of those large things, that huge scenic background of stars,
fires, blue or black air. All heroic endeavour, and all that is
known as art, assumes that there is such a background, just as all
practical endeavour, when the world is to our taste, assumes that
the world is all. But in the twilight of the double vision, a
spiritual muddledom is set up for which no high-sounding words can
be found; we can neither act nor refrain from action, we can
neither ignore nor respect Infinity. Mrs. Moore had always inclined
to resignation. As soon as she landed in India it seemed to her
good, and when she saw the water flowing through the mosque-tank,
or the Ganges, or the moon, caught in the shawl of night with all
the other stars, it seemed a beautiful goal and an easy one. To be
one with the universe! So dignified and simple. But there was
always some little duty to be performed first, some new card to be
turned up from the diminishing pack and placed, and while she was
pottering about, the Marabar struck its gong.

What had spoken to her in that scoured-out cavity of the granite?
What dwelt in the first of the caves? Something very old and very
small. Before time, it was before space also. Something snub-nosed,
incapable of generosity—the undying worm itself. Since hearing its
voice, she had not entertained one large thought, she was actually
envious of Adela. All this fuss over a frightened girl! Nothing
had happened, “and if it had,” she found herself thinking with the
cynicism of a withered priestess, “if it had, there are worse evils
than love.” The unspeakable attempt presented itself to her as
love: in a cave, in a church—Boum, it amounts to the same. Visions
are supposed to entail profundity, but—— Wait till you get one,
dear reader! The abyss also may be petty, the serpent of eternity
made of maggots; her constant thought was: “Less attention should
be paid to my future daughter-in-law and more to me, there is no
sorrow like my sorrow,” although when the attention was paid she
rejected it irritably.

Her son couldn’t escort her to Bombay, for the local situation
continued acute, and all officials had to remain at their posts.
Antony couldn’t come either, in case he never returned to give his
evidence. So she travelled with no one who could remind her of the
past. This was a relief. The heat had drawn back a little before
its next advance, and the journey was not unpleasant. As she left
Chandrapore the moon, full again, shone over the Ganges and touched
the shrinking channels into threads of silver, then veered and
looked into her window. The swift and comfortable mail-train slid
with her through the night, and all the next day she was rushing
through Central India, through landscapes that were baked and
bleached but had not the hopeless melancholy of the plain. She
watched the indestructible life of man and his changing faces, and
the houses he has built for himself and God, and they appeared to
her not in terms of her own trouble but as things to see. There
was, for instance, a place called Asirgarh which she passed at
sunset and identified on a map—an enormous fortress among wooded
hills. No one had ever mentioned Asirgarh to her, but it had huge
and noble bastions and to the right of them was a mosque. She
forgot it. Ten minutes later, Asirgarh reappeared. The mosque was
to the left of the bastions now. The train in its descent through
the Vindyas had described a semicircle round Asirgarh. What could
she connect it with except its own name? Nothing; she knew no one
who lived there. But it had looked at her twice and seemed to say:
“I do not vanish.” She woke in the middle of the night with a
start, for the train was falling over the western cliff. Moonlit
pinnacles rushed up at her like the fringes of a sea; then a brief
episode of plain, the real sea, and the soupy dawn of Bombay. “I
have not seen the right places,” she thought, as she saw embayed
in the platforms of the Victoria Terminus the end of the rails that
had carried her over a continent and could never carry her back.
She would never visit Asirgarh or the other untouched places;
neither Delhi nor Agra nor the Rajputana cities nor Kashmir, nor
the obscurer marvels that had sometimes shone through men’s speech:
the bilingual rock of Girnar, the statue of Shri Belgola, the ruins
of Mandu and Hampi, temples of Khajraha, gardens of Shalimar. As
she drove through the huge city which the West has built and
abandoned with a gesture of despair, she longed to stop, though it
was only Bombay, and disentangle the hundred Indias that passed
each other in its streets. The feet of the horses moved her on,
and presently the boat sailed and thousands of coco-nut palms
appeared all round the anchorage and climbed the hills to wave her
farewell. “So you thought an echo was India; you took the Marabar
caves as final?” they laughed. “What have we in common with them,
or they with Asirgarh? Good-bye!” Then the steamer rounded Colaba,
the continent swung about, the cliff of the Ghats melted into the
haze of a tropic sea. Lady Mellanby turned up and advised her not
to stand in the heat: “We are safely out of the frying-pan,” said
Lady Mellanby, “it will never do to fall into the fire.”




  CHAPTER XXIV


Making sudden changes of gear, the heat accelerated its advance
after Mrs. Moore’s departure until existence had to be endured and
crime punished with the thermometer at a hundred and twelve.
Electric fans hummed and spat, water splashed on to screens, ice
clinked, and outside these defences, between a greyish sky and a
yellowish earth, clouds of dust moved hesitatingly. In Europe life
retreats out of the cold, and exquisite fireside myths have
resulted—Balder, Persephone—but here the retreat is from the source
of life, the treacherous sun, and no poetry adorns it because
disillusionment cannot be beautiful. Men yearn for poetry though
they may not confess it; they desire that joy shall be graceful
and sorrow august and infinity have a form, and India fails to
accommodate them. The annual helter-skelter of April, when
irritability and lust spread like a canker, is one of her comments
on the orderly hopes of humanity. Fish manage better; fish, as the
tanks dry, wriggle into the mud and wait for the rains to uncake
them. But men try to be harmonious all the year round, and the
results are occasionally disastrous. The triumphant machine of
civilization may suddenly hitch and be immobilized into a car of
stone, and at such moments the destiny of the English seems to
resemble their predecessors’, who also entered the country with
intent to refashion it, but were in the end worked into its pattern
and covered with its dust.

Adela, after years of intellectualism, had resumed her morning
kneel to Christianity. There seemed no harm in it, it was the
shortest and easiest cut to the unseen, and she could tack her
troubles on to it. Just as the Hindu clerks asked Lakshmi for an
increase in pay, so did she implore Jehovah for a favourable
verdict. God who saves the King will surely support the police.
Her deity returned a consoling reply, but the touch of her hands
on her face started prickly heat, and she seemed to swallow and
expectorate the same insipid clot of air that had weighed on her
lungs all the night. Also the voice of Mrs. Turton disturbed her.
“Are you ready, young lady?” it pealed from the next room.

“Half a minute,” she murmured. The Turtons had received her after
Mrs. Moore left. Their kindness was incredible, but it was her
position not her character that moved them; she was the English
girl who had had the terrible experience, and for whom too much
could not be done. No one, except Ronny, had any idea of what
passed in her mind, and he only dimly, for where there is
officialism every human relationship suffers. In her sadness she
said to him, “I bring you nothing but trouble; I was right on the
Maidan, we had better just be friends,” but he protested, for the
more she suffered the more highly he valued her. Did she love him?
This question was somehow draggled up with the Marabar, it had been
in her mind as she entered the fatal cave. Was she capable of
loving anyone?

“Miss Quested, Adela, what d’ye call yourself, it’s half-past
seven; we ought to think of starting for that Court when you feel
inclined.”

“She’s saying her prayers,” came the Collector’s voice.

“Sorry, my dear; take your time. . . . Was your chhota hazri all
right?”

“I can’t eat; might I have a little brandy?” she asked, deserting
Jehovah.

When it was brought, she shuddered, and said she was ready to go.

“Drink it up; not a bad notion, a peg.”

“I don’t think it’ll really help me, Burra Sahib.”

“You sent brandy down to the Court, didn’t you, Mary?”

“I should think I did, champagne too.”

“I’ll thank you this evening, I’m all to pieces now,” said the
girl, forming each syllable carefully as if her trouble would
diminish if it were accurately defined. She was afraid of reticence,
in case something that she herself did not perceive took shape
beneath it, and she had rehearsed with Mr. McBryde in an odd,
mincing way her terrible adventure in the cave, how the man had
never actually touched her but dragged her about, and so on. Her
aim this morning was to announce, meticulously, that the strain
was appalling, and she would probably break down under Mr.
Amritrao’s cross-examination and disgrace her friends. “My echo
has come back again badly,” she told them.

“How about aspirin?”

“It is not a headache, it is an echo.”

Unable to dispel the buzzing in her ears, Major Callendar had
diagnosed it as a fancy, which must not be encouraged. So the
Turtons changed the subject. The cool little lick of the breeze
was passing over the earth, dividing night from day; it would fail
in ten minutes, but they might profit by it for their drive down
into the city.

“I am sure to break down,” she repeated.

“You won’t,” said the Collector, his voice full of tenderness.

“Of course she won’t, she’s a real sport.”

“But Mrs. Turton . . .”

“Yes, my dear child?”

“If I do break down, it is of no consequence. It would matter in
some trials, not in this. I put it to myself in the following way:
I can really behave as I like, cry, be absurd, I am sure to get my
verdict, unless Mr. Das is most frightfully unjust.”

“You’re bound to win,” he said calmly, and did not remind her that
there was bound to be an appeal. The Nawab Bahadur had financed
the defence, and would ruin himself sooner than let an “innocent
Moslem perish,” and other interests, less reputable, were in the
background too. The case might go up from court to court, with
consequences that no official could foresee. Under his very eyes,
the temper of Chandrapore was altering. As his car turned out of
the compound, there was a tap of silly anger on its paint—a pebble
thrown by a child. Some larger stones were dropped near the mosque.
In the Maidan, a squad of native police on motor cycles waited to
escort them through the bazaars. The Collector was irritated and
muttered, “McBryde’s an old woman”; but Mrs. Turton said, “Really,
after Mohurram a show of force will do no harm; it’s ridiculous to
pretend they don’t hate us, do give up that farce.” He replied in
an odd, sad voice, “I don’t hate them, I don’t know why,” and he
didn’t hate them; for if he did, he would have had to condemn his
own career as a bad investment. He retained a contemptuous affection
for the pawns he had moved about for so many years, they must be
worth his pains. “After all, it’s our women who make everything
more difficult out here,” was his inmost thought, as he caught
sight of some obscenities upon a long blank wall, and beneath his
chivalry to Miss Quested resentment lurked, waiting its day—perhaps
there is a grain of resentment in all chivalry. Some students had
gathered in front of the City Magistrate’s Court—hysterical boys
whom he would have faced if alone, but he told the driver to work
round to the rear of the building. The students jeered, and Rafi
(hiding behind a comrade that he might not be identified) called
out the English were cowards.

They gained Ronny’s private room, where a group of their own sort
had collected. None were cowardly, all nervy, for queer reports
kept coming in. The Sweepers had just struck, and half the commodes
of Chandrapore remained desolate in consequence—only half, and
Sweepers from the District, who felt less strongly about the
innocence of Dr. Aziz, would arrive in the afternoon, and break
the strike, but why should the grotesque incident occur? And a
number of Mohammedan ladies had sworn to take no food until the
prisoner was acquitted; their death would make little difference,
indeed, being invisible, they seemed dead already, nevertheless it
was disquieting. A new spirit seemed abroad, a rearrangement, which
no one in the stern little band of whites could explain. There was
a tendency to see Fielding at the back of it: the idea that he was
weak and cranky had been dropped. They abused Fielding vigorously:
he had been seen driving up with the two counsels, Amritrao and
Mahmoud Ali; he encouraged the Boy Scout movement for seditious
reasons; he received letters with foreign stamps on them, and was
probably a Japanese spy. This morning’s verdict would break the
renegade, but he had done his country and the Empire incalculable
disservice. While they denounced him, Miss Quested lay back with
her hands on the arms of her chair and her eyes closed, reserving
her strength. They noticed her after a time, and felt ashamed of
making so much noise.

“Can we do nothing for you?” Miss Derek said.

“I don’t think so, Nancy, and I seem able to do nothing for myself.”

“But you’re strictly forbidden to talk like that; you’re wonderful.”

“Yes indeed,” came the reverent chorus.

“My old Das is all right,” said Ronny, starting a new subject in
low tones.

“Not one of them’s all right,” contradicted Major Callendar.

“Das is, really.”

“You mean he’s more frightened of acquitting than convicting,
because if he acquits he’ll lose his job,” said Lesley with a
clever little laugh.

Ronny did mean that, but he cherished “illusions” about his own
subordinates (following the finer traditions of his service here),
and he liked to maintain that his old Das really did possess moral
courage of the Public School brand. He pointed out that—from one
point of view—it was good that an Indian was taking the case.
Conviction was inevitable; so better let an Indian pronounce it,
there would be less fuss in the long run. Interested in the
argument, he let Adela become dim in his mind.

“In fact, you disapprove of the appeal I forwarded to Lady
Mellanby,” said Mrs. Turton with considerable heat. “Pray don’t
apologize, Mr. Heaslop; I am accustomed to being in the wrong.”

“I didn’t mean that . . .”

“All right. I said don’t apologize.”

“Those swine are always on the look-out for a grievance,” said
Lesley, to propitiate her.

“Swine, I should think so,” the Major echoed. “And what’s more,
I’ll tell you what. What’s happened is a damn good thing really,
barring of course its application to present company. It’ll make
them squeal and it’s time they did squeal. I’ve put the fear of
God into them at the hospital anyhow. You should see the grandson
of our so-called leading loyalist.” He tittered brutally as he
described poor Nureddin’s present appearance.

“His beauty’s gone, five upper teeth, two lower and a nostril. . . .
Old Panna Lal brought him the looking-glass yesterday and he
blubbered. . . . I laughed; I laughed, I tell you, and so would
you; that used to be one of these buck niggers, I thought, now he’s
all septic; damn him, blast his soul—er—I believe he was unspeakably
immoral—er——” He subsided, nudged in the ribs, but added, “I wish
I’d had the cutting up of my late assistant too; nothing’s too bad
for these people.”

“At last some sense is being talked,” Mrs. Turton cried, much to
her husband’s discomfort.

“That’s what I say; I say there’s not such a thing as cruelty after
a thing like this.”

“Exactly, and remember it afterwards, you men. You’re weak, weak,
weak. Why, they ought to crawl from here to the caves on their
hands and knees whenever an Englishwoman’s in sight, they oughtn’t
to be spoken to, they ought to be spat at, they ought to be ground
into the dust, we’ve been far too kind with our Bridge Parties and
the rest.”

She paused. Profiting by her wrath, the heat had invaded her. She
subsided into a lemon squash, and continued between the sips to
murmur, “Weak, weak.” And the process was repeated. The issues Miss
Quested had raised were so much more important than she was herself
that people inevitably forgot her.

Presently the case was called.

Their chairs preceded them into the Court, for it was important
that they should look dignified. And when the chuprassies had made
all ready, they filed into the ramshackly room with a condescending
air, as if it was a booth at a fair. The Collector made a small
official joke as he sat down, at which his entourage smiled, and
the Indians, who could not hear what he said, felt that some new
cruelty was afoot, otherwise the sahibs would not chuckle.

The Court was crowded and of course very hot, and the first person
Adela noticed in it was the humblest of all who were present, a
person who had no bearing officially upon the trial: the man who
pulled the punkah. Almost naked, and splendidly formed, he sat on
a raised platform near the back, in the middle of the central
gangway, and he caught her attention as she came in, and he seemed
to control the proceedings. He had the strength and beauty that
sometimes come to flower in Indians of low birth. When that strange
race nears the dust and is condemned as untouchable, then nature
remembers the physical perfection that she accomplished elsewhere,
and throws out a god—not many, but one here and there, to prove to
society how little its categories impress her. This man would have
been notable anywhere: among the thin-hammed, flat-chested
mediocrities of Chandrapore he stood out as divine, yet he was of
the city, its garbage had nourished him, he would end on its
rubbish heaps. Pulling the rope towards him, relaxing it
rhythmically, sending swirls of air over others, receiving none
himself, he seemed apart from human destinies, a male fate, a
winnower of souls. Opposite him, also on a platform, sat the little
assistant magistrate, cultivated, self-conscious, and conscientious.
The punkah wallah was none of these things: he scarcely knew that
he existed and did not understand why the Court was fuller than
usual, indeed he did not know that it was fuller than usual, didn’t
even know he worked a fan, though he thought he pulled a rope.
Something in his aloofness impressed the girl from middle-class
England, and rebuked the narrowness of her sufferings. In virtue
of what had she collected this roomful of people together? Her
particular brand of opinions, and the suburban Jehovah who
sanctified them—by what right did they claim so much importance in
the world, and assume the title of civilization? Mrs. Moore—she
looked round, but Mrs. Moore was far away on the sea; it was the
kind of question they might have discussed on the voyage out before
the old lady had turned disagreeable and queer.

While thinking of Mrs. Moore she heard sounds, which gradually grew
more distinct. The epoch-making trial had started, and the
Superintendent of Police was opening the case for the prosecution.

Mr. McBryde was not at pains to be an interesting speaker; he left
eloquence to the defence, who would require it. His attitude was,
“Everyone knows the man’s guilty, and I am obliged to say so in
public before he goes to the Andamans.” He made no moral or
emotional appeal, and it was only by degrees that the studied
negligence of his manner made itself felt, and lashed part of the
audience to fury. Laboriously did he describe the genesis of the
picnic. The prisoner had met Miss Quested at an entertainment given
by the Principal of Government College, and had there conceived
his intentions concerning her: prisoner was a man of loose life,
as documents found upon him at his arrest would testify, also his
fellow-assistant, Dr. Panna Lal, was in a position to throw light
on his character, and Major Callendar himself would speak. Here
Mr. McBryde paused. He wanted to keep the proceedings as clean as
possible, but Oriental Pathology, his favourite theme, lay around
him, and he could not resist it. Taking off his spectacles, as was
his habit before enunciating a general truth, he looked into them
sadly, and remarked that the darker races are physically attracted
by the fairer, but not _vice versa_—not a matter for bitterness
this, not a matter for abuse, but just a fact which any scientific
observer will confirm.

“Even when the lady is so uglier than the gentleman?” The comment
fell from nowhere, from the ceiling perhaps. It was the first
interruption, and the Magistrate felt bound to censure it. “Turn
that man out,” he said. One of the native policemen took hold of
a man who had said nothing, and turned him out roughly.

Mr. McBryde resumed his spectacles and proceeded. But the comment
had upset Miss Quested. Her body resented being called ugly, and
trembled.

“Do you feel faint, Adela?” asked Miss Derek, who tended her with
loving indignation.

“I never feel anything else, Nancy. I shall get through, but it’s
awful, awful.”

This led to the first of a series of scenes. Her friends began to
fuss around her, and the Major called out, “I must have better
arrangements than this made for my patient; why isn’t she given a
seat on the platform? She gets no air.”

Mr. Das looked annoyed and said: “I shall be happy to accommodate
Miss Quested with a chair up here in view of the particular
circumstances of her health.” The chuprassies passed up not one
chair but several, and the entire party followed Adela on to the
platform, Mr. Fielding being the only European who remained in the
body of the hall.

“That’s better,” remarked Mrs. Turton, as she settled herself.

“Thoroughly desirable change for several reasons,” replied the
Major.

The Magistrate knew that he ought to censure this remark, but did
not dare to. Callendar saw that he was afraid, and called out
authoritatively, “Right, McBryde, go ahead now; sorry to have
interrupted you.”

“Are you all right yourselves?” asked the Superintendent.

“We shall do, we shall do.”

“Go on, Mr. Das, we are not here to disturb you,” said the Collector
patronizingly. Indeed, they had not so much disturbed the trial as
taken charge of it.

While the prosecution continued, Miss Quested examined the
hall—timidly at first, as though it would scorch her eyes. She
observed to left and right of the punkah man many a half-known
face. Beneath her were gathered all the wreckage of her silly
attempt to see India—the people she had met at the Bridge Party,
the man and his wife who hadn’t sent their carriage, the old man
who would lend his car, various servants, villagers, officials,
and the prisoner himself. There he sat—strong, neat little Indian
with very black hair, and pliant hands. She viewed him without
special emotion. Since they last met, she had elevated him into a
principle of evil, but now he seemed to be what he had always
been—a slight acquaintance. He was negligible, devoid of
significance, dry like a bone, and though he was “guilty” no
atmosphere of sin surrounded him. “I suppose he _is_ guilty. Can
I possibly have made a mistake?” she thought. For this question
still occurred to her intellect, though since Mrs. Moore’s departure
it had ceased to trouble her conscience.

Pleader Mahmoud Ali now arose, and asked with ponderous and
ill-judged irony whether his client could be accommodated on the
platform too: even Indians felt unwell sometimes, though naturally
Major Callendar did not think so, being in charge of a Government
Hospital. “Another example of their exquisite sense of humour,”
sang Miss Derek. Ronny looked at Mr. Das to see how he would handle
the difficulty, and Mr. Das became agitated, and snubbed Pleader
Mahmoud Ali severely.

“Excuse me——” It was the turn of the eminent barrister from
Calcutta. He was a fine-looking man, large and bony, with grey
closely cropped hair. “We object to the presence of so many European
ladies and gentlemen upon the platform,” he said in an Oxford
voice. “They will have the effect of intimidating our witnesses.
Their place is with the rest of the public in the body of the hall.
We have no objection to Miss Quested remaining on the platform,
since she has been unwell; we shall extend every courtesy to her
throughout, despite the scientific truths revealed to us by the
District Superintendent of Police; but we do object to the others.”

“Oh, cut the cackle and let’s have the verdict,” the Major growled.

The distinguished visitor gazed at the Magistrate respectfully.

“I agree to that,” said Mr. Das, hiding his face desperately in
some papers. “It was only to Miss Quested that I gave permission
to sit up here. Her friends should be so excessively kind as to
climb down.”

“Well done, Das, quite sound,” said Ronny with devastating honesty.

“Climb down, indeed, what incredible impertinence!” Mrs. Turton
cried.

“Do come quietly, Mary,” murmured her husband.

“Hi! my patient can’t be left unattended.”

“Do you object to the Civil Surgeon remaining, Mr. Amritrao?”

“I should object. A platform confers authority.”

“Even when it’s one foot high; so come along all,” said the
Collector, trying to laugh.

“Thank you very much, sir,” said Mr. Das, greatly relieved. “Thank
you, Mr. Heaslop; thank you ladies all.”

And the party, including Miss Quested, descended from its rash
eminence. The news of their humiliation spread quickly, and people
jeered outside. Their special chairs followed them. Mahmoud Ali
(who was quite silly and useless with hatred) objected even to
these; by whose authority had special chairs been introduced, why
had the Nawab Bahadur not been given one? etc. People began to talk
all over the room, about chairs ordinary and special, strips of
carpet, platforms one foot high.

But the little excursion had a good effect on Miss Quested’s
nerves. She felt easier now that she had seen all the people who
were in the room. It was like knowing the worst. She was sure now
that she should come through “all right”—that is to say, without
spiritual disgrace, and she passed the good news on to Ronny and
Mrs. Turton. They were too much agitated with the defeat to British
prestige to be interested. From where she sat, she could see the
renegade Mr. Fielding. She had had a better view of him from the
platform, and knew that an Indian child perched on his knee. He
was watching the proceedings, watching her. When their eyes met,
he turned his away, as if direct intercourse was of no interest to
him.

The Magistrate was also happier. He had won the battle of the
platform, and gained confidence. Intelligent and impartial, he
continued to listen to the evidence, and tried to forget that later
on he should have to pronounce a verdict in accordance with it.
The Superintendent trundled steadily forward: he had expected these
outbursts of insolence—they are the natural gestures of an inferior
race, and he betrayed no hatred of Aziz, merely an abysmal contempt.

The speech dealt at length with the “prisoner’s dupes,” as they
were called—Fielding, the servant Antony, the Nawab Bahadur. This
aspect of the case had always seemed dubious to Miss Quested, and
she had asked the police not to develop it. But they were playing
for a heavy sentence, and wanted to prove that the assault was
premeditated. And in order to illustrate the strategy, they produced
a plan of the Marabar Hills, showing the route that the party had
taken, and the “Tank of the Dagger” where they had camped.

The Magistrate displayed interest in archæology.

An elevation of a specimen cave was produced; it was lettered
“Buddhist Cave.”

“Not Buddhist, I think, Jain. . . .”

“In which cave is the offence alleged, the Buddhist or the Jain?”
asked Mahmoud Ali, with the air of unmasking a conspiracy.

“All the Marabar caves are Jain.”

“Yes, sir; then in which Jain cave?”

“You will have an opportunity of putting such questions later.”

Mr. McBryde smiled faintly at their fatuity. Indians invariably
collapse over some such point as this. He knew that the defence
had some wild hope of establishing an alibi, that they had tried
(unsuccessfully) to identify the guide, and that Fielding and
Hamidullah had gone out to the Kawa Dol and paced and measured all
one moonlit night. “Mr. Lesley says they’re Buddhist, and he ought
to know if anyone does. But may I call attention to the shape?”
And he described what had occurred there. Then he spoke of Miss
Derek’s arrival, of the scramble down the gully, of the return of
the two ladies to Chandrapore, and of the document Miss Quested
signed on her arrival, in which mention was made of the
field-glasses. And then came the culminating evidence: the discovery
of the field-glasses on the prisoner. “I have nothing to add at
present,” he concluded, removing his spectacles. “I will now call
my witnesses. The facts will speak for themselves. The prisoner is
one of those individuals who have led a double life. I dare say
his degeneracy gained upon him gradually. He has been very cunning
at concealing, as is usual with the type, and pretending to be a
respectable member of society, getting a Government position even.
He is now entirely vicious and beyond redemption, I am afraid. He
behaved most cruelly, most brutally, to another of his guests,
another English lady. In order to get rid of her, and leave him
free for his crime, he crushed her into a cave among his servants.
However, that is by the way.”

But his last words brought on another storm, and suddenly a new
name, Mrs. Moore, burst on the court like a whirlwind. Mahmoud Ali
had been enraged, his nerves snapped; he shrieked like a maniac,
and asked whether his client was charged with murder as well as
rape, and who was this second English lady.

“I don’t propose to call her.”

“You don’t because you can’t, you have smuggled her out of the
country; she is Mrs. Moore, she would have proved his innocence,
she was on our side, she was poor Indians’ friend.”

“You could have called her yourself,” cried the Magistrate. “Neither
side called her, neither must quote her as evidence.”

“She was kept from us until too late—I learn too late—this is
English justice, here is your British Raj. Give us back Mrs. Moore
for five minutes only, and she will save my friend, she will save
the name of his sons; don’t rule her out, Mr. Das; take back those
words as you yourself are a father; tell me where they have put
her, oh, Mrs. Moore. . . .”

“If the point is of any interest, my mother should have reached
Aden,” said Ronny dryly; he ought not to have intervened, but the
onslaught had startled him.

“Imprisoned by you there because she knew the truth.” He was almost
out of his mind, and could be heard saying above the tumult: “I
ruin my career, no matter; we are all to be ruined one by one.”

“This is no way to defend your case,” counselled the Magistrate.

“I am not defending a case, nor are you trying one. We are both of
us slaves.”

“Mr. Mahmoud Ali, I have already warned you, and unless you sit
down I shall exercise my authority.”

“Do so; this trial is a farce, I am going.” And he handed his
papers to Amritrao and left, calling from the door histrionically
yet with intense passion, “Aziz, Aziz—farewell for ever.” The
tumult increased, the invocation of Mrs. Moore continued, and
people who did not know what the syllables meant repeated them like
a charm. They became Indianized into Esmiss Esmoor, they were taken
up in the street outside. In vain the Magistrate threatened and
expelled. Until the magic exhausted itself, he was powerless.

“Unexpected,” remarked Mr. Turton.

Ronny furnished the explanation. Before she sailed, his mother had
taken to talk about the Marabar in her sleep, especially in the
afternoon when servants were on the verandah, and her disjointed
remarks on Aziz had doubtless been sold to Mahmoud Ali for a few
annas: that kind of thing never ceases in the East.

“I thought they’d try something of the sort. Ingenious.” He looked
into their wide-open mouths. “They get just like over their
religion,” he added calmly. “Start and can’t stop. I’m sorry for
your old Das, he’s not getting much of a show.”

“Mr. Heaslop, how disgraceful dragging in your dear mother,” said
Miss Derek, bending forward.

“It’s just a trick, and they happened to pull it off. Now one sees
why they had Mahmoud Ali—just to make a scene on the chance. It is
his speciality.” But he disliked it more than he showed. It was
revolting to hear his mother travestied into Esmiss Esmoor, a Hindu
goddess.

  “Esmiss Esmoor
   Esmiss Esmoor
   Esmiss Esmoor
   Esmiss Esmoor. . . .”

“Ronny——”

“Yes, old girl?”

“Isn’t it all queer.”

“I’m afraid it’s very upsetting for you.”

“Not the least. I don’t mind it.”

“Well, that’s good.”

She had spoken more naturally and healthily than usual. Bending
into the middle of her friends, she said: “Don’t worry about me,
I’m much better than I was; I don’t feel the least faint; I shall
be all right, and thank you all, thank you, thank you for your
kindness.” She had to shout her gratitude, for the chant, Esmiss
Esmoor, went on.

Suddenly it stopped. It was as if the prayer had been heard, and
the relics exhibited. “I apologize for my colleague,” said Mr.
Amritrao, rather to everyone’s surprise. “He is an intimate friend
of our client, and his feelings have carried him away.”

“Mr. Mahmoud Ali will have to apologize in person,” the Magistrate
said.

“Exactly, sir, he must. But we had just learnt that Mrs. Moore had
important evidence which she desired to give. She was hurried out
of the country by her son before she could give it; and this
unhinged Mr. Mahmoud Ali—coming as it does upon an attempt to
intimidate our only other European witness, Mr. Fielding. Mr.
Mahmoud Ali would have said nothing had not Mrs. Moore been claimed
as a witness by the police.” He sat down.

“An extraneous element is being introduced into the case,” said
the Magistrate. “I must repeat that as a witness Mrs. Moore does
not exist. Neither you, Mr. Amritrao, nor, Mr. McBryde, you, have
any right to surmise what that lady would have said. She is not
here, and consequently she can say nothing.”

“Well, I withdraw my reference,” said the Superintendent wearily.
“I would have done so fifteen minutes ago if I had been given the
chance. She is not of the least importance to me.”

“I have already withdrawn it for the defence.” He added with
forensic humour: “Perhaps you can persuade the gentlemen outside
to withdraw it too,” for the refrain in the street continued.

“I am afraid my powers do not extend so far,” said Das, smiling.

So peace was restored, and when Adela came to give her evidence
the atmosphere was quieter than it had been since the beginning of
the trial. Experts were not surprised. There is no stay in your
native. He blazes up over a minor point, and has nothing left for
the crisis. What he seeks is a grievance, and this he had found in
the supposed abduction of an old lady. He would now be less
aggrieved when Aziz was deported.

But the crisis was still to come.

Adela had always meant to tell the truth and nothing but the truth,
and she had rehearsed this as a difficult task—difficult, because
her disaster in the cave was connected, though by a thread, with
another part of her life, her engagement to Ronny. She had thought
of love just before she went in, and had innocently asked Aziz what
marriage was like, and she supposed that her question had roused
evil in him. To recount this would have been incredibly painful,
it was the one point she wanted to keep obscure; she was willing
to give details that would have distressed other girls, but this
story of her private failure she dared not allude to, and she
dreaded being examined in public in case something came out. But
as soon as she rose to reply, and heard the sound of her own voice,
she feared not even that. A new and unknown sensation protected
her, like magnificent armour. She didn’t think what had happened,
or even remember in the ordinary way of memory, but she returned
to the Marabar Hills, and spoke from them across a sort of darkness
to Mr. McBryde. The fatal day recurred, in every detail, but now
she was of it and not of it at the same time, and this double
relation gave it indescribable splendour. Why had she thought the
expedition “dull”? Now the sun rose again, the elephant waited,
the pale masses of the rock flowed round her and presented the
first cave; she entered, and a match was reflected in the polished
walls—all beautiful and significant, though she had been blind to
it at the time. Questions were asked, and to each she found the
exact reply; yes, she had noticed the “Tank of the Dagger,” but
not known its name; yes, Mrs. Moore had been tired after the first
cave and sat in the shadow of a great rock, near the dried-up mud.
Smoothly the voice in the distance proceeded, leading along the
paths of truth, and the airs from the punkah behind her wafted her
on. . . .

“. . . the prisoner and the guide took you on to the Kawa Dol, no
one else being present?”

“The most wonderfully shaped of those hills. Yes.” As she spoke,
she created the Kawa Dol, saw the niches up the curve of the stone,
and felt the heat strike her face. And something caused her to add:
“No one else was present to my knowledge. We appeared to be alone.”

“Very well, there is a ledge half-way up the hill, or broken ground
rather, with caves scattered near the beginning of a nullah.”

“I know where you mean.”

“You went alone into one of those caves?”

“That is quite correct.”

“And the prisoner followed you.”

“Now we’ve got ’im,” from the Major.

She was silent. The court, the place of question, awaited her
reply. But she could not give it until Aziz entered the place of
answer.

“The prisoner followed you, didn’t he?” he repeated in the
monotonous tones that they both used; they were employing agreed
words throughout, so that this part of the proceedings held no
surprises.

“May I have half a minute before I reply to that, Mr. McBryde?”

“Certainly.”

Her vision was of several caves. She saw herself in one, and she
was also outside it, watching its entrance, for Aziz to pass in.
She failed to locate him. It was the doubt that had often visited
her, but solid and attractive, like the hills, “I am not——” Speech
was more difficult than vision. “I am not quite sure.”

“I beg your pardon?” said the Superintendent of Police.

“I cannot be sure . . .”

“I didn’t catch that answer.” He looked scared, his mouth shut with
a snap. “You are on that landing, or whatever we term it, and you
have entered a cave. I suggest to you that the prisoner followed
you.”

She shook her head.

“What do you mean, please?”

“No,” she said in a flat, unattractive voice. Slight noises began
in various parts of the room, but no one yet understood what was
occurring except Fielding. He saw that she was going to have a
nervous breakdown and that his friend was saved.

“What is that, what are you saying? Speak up, please.” The
Magistrate bent forward.

“I’m afraid I have made a mistake.”

“What nature of mistake?”

“Dr. Aziz never followed me into the cave.”

The Superintendent slammed down his papers, then picked them up
and said calmly: “Now, Miss Quested, let us go on. I will read you
the words of the deposition which you signed two hours later in my
bungalow.”

“Excuse me, Mr. McBryde, you cannot go on. I am speaking to the
witness myself. And the public will be silent. If it continues to
talk, I have the court cleared. Miss Quested, address your remarks
to me, who am the Magistrate in charge of the case, and realize
their extreme gravity. Remember you speak on oath, Miss Quested.”

“Dr. Aziz never——”

“I stop these proceedings on medical grounds,” cried the Major on
a word from Turton, and all the English rose from their chairs at
once, large white figures behind which the little magistrate was
hidden. The Indians rose too, hundreds of things went on at once,
so that afterwards each person gave a different account of the
catastrophe.

“You withdraw the charge? Answer me,” shrieked the representative
of Justice.

Something that she did not understand took hold of the girl and
pulled her through. Though the vision was over, and she had returned
to the insipidity of the world, she remembered what she had learnt.
Atonement and confession—they could wait. It was in hard prosaic
tones that she said, “I withdraw everything.”

“Enough—sit down. Mr. McBryde, do you wish to continue in the face
of this?”

The Superintendent gazed at his witness as if she was a broken
machine, and said, “Are you mad?”

“Don’t question her, sir; you have no longer the right.”

“Give me time to consider——”

“Sahib, you will have to withdraw; this becomes a scandal,” boomed
the Nawab Bahadur suddenly from the back of the court.

“He shall not,” shouted Mrs. Turton against the gathering tumult.
“Call the other witnesses; we’re none of us safe——” Ronny tried to
check her, and she gave him an irritable blow, then screamed
insults at Adela.

The Superintendent moved to the support of his friends, saying
nonchalantly to the Magistrate as he did so, “Right, I withdraw.”

Mr. Das rose, nearly dead with the strain. He had controlled the
case, just controlled it. He had shown that an Indian can preside.
To those who could hear him he said, “The prisoner is released
without one stain on his character; the question of costs will be
decided elsewhere.”

And then the flimsy framework of the court broke up, the shouts of
derision and rage culminated, people screamed and cursed, kissed
one another, wept passionately. Here were the English, whom their
servants protected, there Aziz fainted in Hamidullah’s arms.
Victory on this side, defeat on that—complete for one moment was
the antithesis. Then life returned to its complexities, person
after person struggled out of the room to their various purposes,
and before long no one remained on the scene of the fantasy but
the beautiful naked god. Unaware that anything unusual had occurred,
he continued to pull the cord of his punkah, to gaze at the empty
dais and the overturned special chairs, and rhythmically to agitate
the clouds of descending dust.




  CHAPTER XXV


Miss Quested had renounced her own people. Turning from them, she
was drawn into a mass of Indians of the shopkeeping class, and
carried by them towards the public exit of the court. The faint,
indescribable smell of the bazaars invaded her, sweeter than a
London slum, yet more disquieting: a tuft of scented cotton wool,
wedged in an old man’s ear, fragments of pan between his black
teeth, odorous powders, oils—the Scented East of tradition, but
blended with human sweat as if a great king had been entangled in
ignominy and could not free himself, or as if the heat of the sun
had boiled and fried all the glories of the earth into a single
mess. They paid no attention to her. They shook hands over her
shoulder, shouted through her body—for when the Indian does ignore
his rulers, he becomes genuinely unaware of their existence.
Without part in the universe she had created, she was flung against
Mr. Fielding.

“What do you want here?”

Knowing him for her enemy, she passed on into the sunlight without
speaking.

He called after her, “Where are you going, Miss Quested?”

“I don’t know.”

“You can’t wander about like that. Where’s the car you came in?”

“I shall walk.”

“What madness . . . there’s supposed to be a riot on . . . the
police have struck, no one knows what’ll happen next. Why don’t
you keep to your own people?”

“Ought I to join them?” she said, without emotion. She felt emptied,
valueless; there was no more virtue in her.

“You can’t, it’s too late. How are you to get round to the private
entrance now? Come this way with me—quick—I’ll put you into my
carriage.”

“Cyril, Cyril, don’t leave me,” called the shattered voice of Aziz.

“I’m coming back. . . . This way, and don’t argue.” He gripped her
arm. “Excuse manners, but I don’t know anyone’s position. Send my
carriage back any time to-morrow, if you please.”

“But where am I to go in it?”

“Where you like. How should I know your arrangements?”

The victoria was safe in a quiet side lane, but there were no
horses, for the sais, not expecting the trial would end so abruptly,
had led them away to visit a friend. She got into it obediently.
The man could not leave her, for the confusion increased, and spots
of it sounded fanatical. The main road through the bazaars was
blocked, and the English were gaining the civil station by by-ways;
they were caught like caterpillars, and could have been killed off
easily.

“What—what have you been doing?” he cried suddenly. “Playing a
game, studying life, or what?”

“Sir, I intend these for you, sir,” interrupted a student, running
down the lane with a garland of jasmine on his arm.

“I don’t want the rubbish; get out.”

“Sir, I am a horse, we shall be your horses,” another cried as he
lifted the shafts of the victoria into the air.

“Fetch my sais, Rafi; there’s a good chap.”

“No, sir, this is an honour for us.”

Fielding wearied of his students. The more they honoured him the
less they obeyed. They lassoed him with jasmine and roses, scratched
the splash-board against a wall, and recited a poem, the noise of
which filled the lane with a crowd.

“Hurry up, sir; we pull you in a procession.” And, half affectionate,
half impudent, they bundled him in.

“I don’t know whether this suits you, but anyhow you’re safe,” he
remarked. The carriage jerked into the main bazaar, where it
created some sensation. Miss Quested was so loathed in Chandrapore
that her recantation was discredited, and the rumour ran that she
had been stricken by the Deity in the middle of her lies. But they
cheered when they saw her sitting by the heroic Principal (some
addressed her as Mrs. Moore!), and they garlanded her to match him.
Half gods, half guys, with sausages of flowers round their necks,
the pair were dragged in the wake of Aziz’ victorious landau. In
the applause that greeted them some derision mingled. The English
always stick together! That was the criticism. Nor was it unjust.
Fielding shared it himself, and knew that if some misunderstanding
occurred, and an attack was made on the girl by his allies, he
would be obliged to die in her defence. He didn’t want to die for
her, he wanted to be rejoicing with Aziz.

Where was the procession going? To friends, to enemies, to Aziz’
bungalow, to the Collector’s bungalow, to the Minto Hospital where
the Civil Surgeon would eat dust and the patients (confused with
prisoners) be released, to Delhi, Simla. The students thought it
was going to Government College. When they reached a turning, they
twisted the victoria to the right, ran it by side lanes down a hill
and through a garden gate into the mango plantation, and, as far
as Fielding and Miss Quested were concerned, all was peace and
quiet. The trees were full of glossy foliage and slim green fruit,
the tank slumbered; and beyond it rose the exquisite blue arches
of the garden-house. “Sir, we fetch the others; sir, it is a
somewhat heavy load for our arms,” were heard. Fielding took the
refugee to his office, and tried to telephone to McBryde. But this
he could not do; the wires had been cut. All his servants had
decamped. Once more he was unable to desert her. He assigned her
a couple of rooms, provided her with ice and drinks and biscuits,
advised her to lie down, and lay down himself—there was nothing
else to do. He felt restless and thwarted as he listened to the
retreating sounds of the procession, and his joy was rather spoilt
by bewilderment. It was a victory, but such a queer one.

At that moment Aziz was crying, “Cyril, Cyril . . .” Crammed into
a carriage with the Nawab Bahadur, Hamidullah, Mahmoud Ali, his
own little boys, and a heap of flowers, he was not content; he
wanted to be surrounded by all who loved him. Victory gave no
pleasure, he had suffered too much. From the moment of his arrest
he was done for, he had dropped like a wounded animal; he had
despaired, not through cowardice, but because he knew that an
Englishwoman’s word would always outweigh his own. “It is fate,”
he said; and, “It is fate,” when he was imprisoned anew after
Mohurram. All that existed, in that terrible time, was affection,
and affection was all that he felt in the first painful moments of
his freedom. “Why isn’t Cyril following? Let us turn back.” But
the procession could not turn back. Like a snake in a drain, it
advanced down the narrow bazaar towards the basin of the Maidan,
where it would turn about itself, and decide on its prey.

“Forward, forward,” shrieked Mahmoud Ali, whose every utterance
had become a yell. “Down with the Collector, down with the
Superintendent of Police.”

“Mr. Mahmoud Ali, this is not wise,” implored the Nawab Bahadur:
he knew that nothing was gained by attacking the English, who had
fallen into their own pit and had better be left there; moreover,
he had great possessions and deprecated anarchy.

“Cyril, again you desert,” cried Aziz.

“Yet some orderly demonstration is necessary,” said Hamidullah,
“otherwise they will still think we are afraid.”

“Down with the Civil Surgeon . . . rescue Nureddin.”

“Nureddin?”

“They are torturing him.”

“Oh, my God . . .”—for this, too, was a friend.

“They are not. I will not have my grandson made an excuse for an
attack on the hospital,” the old man protested.

“They are. Callendar boasted so before the trial. I heard through
the tatties; he said, ‘I have tortured that nigger.’”

“Oh, my God, my God. . . . He called him a nigger, did he?”

“They put pepper instead of antiseptic on the wounds.”

“Mr. Mahmoud Ali, impossible; a little roughness will not hurt the
boy, he needs discipline.”

“Pepper. Civil Surgeon said so. They hope to destroy us one by one;
they shall fail.”

The new injury lashed the crowd to fury. It had been aimless
hitherto, and had lacked a grievance. When they reached the Maidan
and saw the sallow arcades of the Minto they shambled towards it
howling. It was near midday. The earth and sky were insanely ugly,
the spirit of evil again strode abroad. The Nawab Bahadur alone
struggled against it, and told himself that the rumour must be
untrue. He had seen his grandson in the ward only last week. But
he too was carried forward over the new precipice. To rescue, to
maltreat Major Callendar in revenge, and then was to come the turn
of the civil station generally.

But disaster was averted, and averted by Dr. Panna Lal.

Dr. Panna Lal had offered to give evidence for the prosecution in
the hope of pleasing the English, also because he hated Aziz. When
the case broke down, he was in a very painful position. He saw the
crash coming sooner than most people, slipped from the court before
Mr. Das had finished, and drove Dapple off through the bazaars, in
flight from the wrath to come. In the hospital he should be safe,
for Major Callendar would protect him. But the Major had not come,
and now things were worse than ever, for here was a mob, entirely
desirous of his blood, and the orderlies were mutinous and would
not help him over the back wall, or rather hoisted him and let him
drop back, to the satisfaction of the patients. In agony he cried,
“Man can but die the once,” and waddled across the compound to meet
the invasion, salaaming with one hand and holding up a pale yellow
umbrella in the other. “Oh, forgive me,” he whined as he approached
the victorious landau. “Oh, Dr. Aziz, forgive the wicked lies I
told.” Aziz was silent, the others thickened their throats and
threw up their chins in token of scorn. “I was afraid, I was
mislaid,” the suppliant continued. “I was mislaid here, there, and
everywhere as regards your character. Oh, forgive the poor old
hakim who gave you milk when ill! Oh, Nawab Bahadur, whoever
merciful, is it my poor little dispensary you require? Take every
cursed bottle.” Agitated, but alert, he saw them smile at his
indifferent English, and suddenly he started playing the buffoon,
flung down his umbrella, trod through it, and struck himself upon
the nose. He knew what he was doing, and so did they. There was
nothing pathetic or eternal in the degradation of such a man. Of
ignoble origin, Dr. Panna Lal possessed nothing that could be
disgraced, and he wisely decided to make the other Indians feel
like kings, because it would put them into better tempers. When he
found they wanted Nureddin, he skipped like a goat, he scuttled
like a hen to do their bidding, the hospital was saved, and to the
end of his life he could not understand why he had not obtained
promotion on the morning’s work. “Promptness, sir, promptness
similar to you,” was the argument he employed to Major Callendar
when claiming it.

When Nureddin emerged, his face all bandaged, there was a roar of
relief as though the Bastille had fallen. It was the crisis of the
march, and the Nawab Bahadur managed to get the situation into
hand. Embracing the young man publicly, he began a speech about
Justice, Courage, Liberty, and Prudence, ranged under heads, which
cooled the passion of the crowd. He further announced that he
should give up his British-conferred title, and live as a private
gentleman, plain Mr. Zulfiqar, for which reason he was instantly
proceeding to his country seat. The landau turned, the crowd
accompanied it, the crisis was over. The Marabar caves had been a
terrible strain on the local administration; they altered a good
many lives and wrecked several careers, but they did not break up
a continent or even dislocate a district.

“We will have rejoicings to-night,” the old man said. “Mr.
Hamidullah, I depute you to bring out our friends Fielding and
Amritrao, and to discover whether the latter will require special
food. The others will keep with me. We shall not go out to Dilkusha
until the cool of the evening, of course. I do not know the feelings
of other gentlemen; for my own part, I have a slight headache, and
I wish I had thought to ask our good Panna Lal for aspirin.”

For the heat was claiming its own. Unable to madden, it stupefied,
and before long most of the Chandrapore combatants were asleep.
Those in the civil station kept watch a little, fearing an attack,
but presently they too entered the world of dreams—that world in
which a third of each man’s life is spent, and which is thought by
some pessimists to be a premonition of eternity.




  CHAPTER XXVI


Evening approached by the time Fielding and Miss Quested met and
had the first of their numerous curious conversations. He had
hoped, when he woke up, to find someone had fetched her away, but
the College remained isolated from the rest of the universe. She
asked whether she could have “a sort of interview,” and, when he
made no reply, said, “Have you any explanation of my extraordinary
behaviour?”

“None,” he said curtly. “Why make such a charge if you were going
to withdraw it?”

“Why, indeed.”

“I ought to feel grateful to you, I suppose, but——”

“I don’t expect gratitude. I only thought you might care to hear
what I have to say.”

“Oh, well,” he grumbled, feeling rather schoolboyish. “I don’t
think a discussion between us is desirable. To put it frankly, I
belong to the other side in this ghastly affair.”

“Would it not interest you to hear my side?”

“Not much.”

“I shouldn’t tell you in confidence, of course. So you can hand on
all my remarks to your side, for there is one great mercy that has
come out of all to-day’s misery: I have no longer any secrets. My
echo has gone—I call the buzzing sound in my ears an echo. You see,
I have been unwell ever since that expedition to the caves, and
possibly before it.”

The remark interested him rather; it was what he had sometimes
suspected himself. “What kind of illness?” he enquired.

She touched her head at the side, then shook it.

“That was my first thought, the day of the arrest: hallucination.”

“Do you think that would be so?” she asked with great humility.
“What should have given me an hallucination?”

“One of three things certainly happened in the Marabar,” he said,
getting drawn into a discussion against his will. “One of four
things. Either Aziz is guilty, which is what your friends think;
or you invented the charge out of malice, which is what my friends
think; or you have had an hallucination. I’m very much
inclined”—getting up and striding about—“now that you tell me that
you felt unwell before the expedition—it’s an important piece of
evidence—I believe that you yourself broke the strap of the
field-glasses; you were alone in that cave the whole time.”

“Perhaps. . . .”

“Can you remember when you first felt out of sorts?”

“When I came to tea with you there, in that garden-house.”

“A somewhat unlucky party. Aziz and old Godbole were both ill after
it too.”

“I was not ill—it is far too vague to mention: it is all mixed up
with my private affairs. I enjoyed the singing . . . but just about
then a sort of sadness began that I couldn’t detect at the time . . .
no, nothing as solid as sadness: living at half pressure
expresses it best. Half pressure. I remember going on to polo with
Mr. Heaslop at the Maidan. Various other things happened—it doesn’t
matter what, but I was under par for all of them. I was certainly
in that state when I saw the caves, and you suggest (nothing shocks
or hurts me)—you suggest that I had an hallucination there, the
sort of thing—though in an awful form—that makes some women think
they’ve had an offer of marriage when none was made.”

“You put it honestly, anyhow.”

“I was brought up to be honest; the trouble is it gets me nowhere.”

Liking her better, he smiled and said, “It’ll get us to heaven.”

“Will it?”

“If heaven existed.”

“Do you not believe in heaven, Mr. Fielding, may I ask?” she said,
looking at him shyly.

“I do not. Yet I believe that honesty gets us there.”

“How can that be?”

“Let us go back to hallucinations. I was watching you carefully
through your evidence this morning, and if I’m right, the
hallucination (what you call half pressure—quite as good a word)
disappeared suddenly.”

She tried to remember what she had felt in court, but could not;
the vision disappeared whenever she wished to interpret it. “Events
presented themselves to me in their logical sequence,” was what
she said, but it hadn’t been that at all.

“My belief—and of course I was listening carefully, in hope you
would make some slip—my belief is that poor McBryde exorcised you.
As soon as he asked you a straightforward question, you gave a
straightforward answer, and broke down.”

“Exorcise in that sense. I thought you meant I’d seen a ghost.”

“I don’t go to that length!”

“People whom I respect very much believe in ghosts,” she said
rather sharply. “My friend Mrs. Moore does.”

“She’s an old lady.”

“I think you need not be impolite to her, as well as to her son.”

“I did not intend to be rude. I only meant it is difficult, as we
get on in life, to resist the supernatural. I’ve felt it coming on
me myself. I still jog on without it, but what a temptation, at
forty-five, to pretend that the dead live again; one’s own dead;
no one else’s matter.”

“Because the dead don’t live again.”

“I fear not.”

“So do I.”

There was a moment’s silence, such as often follows the triumph of
rationalism. Then he apologized handsomely enough for his behaviour
to Heaslop at the club.

“What does Dr. Aziz say of me?” she asked, after another pause.

“He—he has not been capable of thought in his misery, naturally
he’s very bitter,” said Fielding, a little awkward, because such
remarks as Aziz had made were not merely bitter, they were foul.
The underlying notion was, “It disgraces me to have been mentioned
in connection with such a hag.” It enraged him that he had been
accused by a woman who had no personal beauty; sexually, he was a
snob. This had puzzled and worried Fielding. Sensuality, as long
as it is straight-forward, did not repel him, but this derived
sensuality—the sort that classes a mistress among motor-cars if
she is beautiful, and among eye-flies if she isn’t—was alien to
his own emotions, and he felt a barrier between himself and Aziz
whenever it arose. It was, in a new form, the old, old trouble that
eats the heart out of every civilization: snobbery, the desire for
possessions, creditable appendages; and it is to escape this rather
than the lusts of the flesh that saints retreat into the Himalayas.
To change the subject, he said, “But let me conclude my analysis.
We are agreed that he is not a villain and that you are not one,
and we aren’t really sure that it was an hallucination. There’s a
fourth possibility which we must touch on: was it somebody else?”

“The guide.”

“Exactly, the guide. I often think so. Unluckily Aziz hit him on
the face, and he got a fright and disappeared. It is most
unsatisfactory, and we hadn’t the police to help us, the guide was
of no interest to them.”

“Perhaps it was the guide,” she said quietly; the question had lost
interest for her suddenly.

“Or could it have been one of that gang of Pathans who have been
drifting through the district?”

“Someone who was in another cave, and followed me when the guide
was looking away? Possibly.”

At that moment Hamidullah joined them, and seemed not too pleased
to find them closeted together. Like everyone else in Chandrapore,
he could make nothing of Miss Quested’s conduct. He had overheard
their last remark. “Hullo, my dear Fielding,” he said. “So I run
you down at last. Can you come out at once to Dilkusha?”

“At once?”

“I hope to leave in a moment, don’t let me interrupt,” said Adela.

“The telephone has been broken; Miss Quested can’t ring up her
friends,” he explained.

“A great deal has been broken, more than will ever be mended,” said
the other. “Still, there should be some way of transporting this
lady back to the civil lines. The resources of civilization are
numerous.” He spoke without looking at Miss Quested, and he ignored
the slight movement she made towards him with her hand.

Fielding, who thought the meeting might as well be friendly, said,
“Miss Quested has been explaining a little about her conduct of
this morning.”

“Perhaps the age of miracles has returned. One must be prepared
for everything, our philosophers say.”

“It must have seemed a miracle to the onlookers,” said Adela,
addressing him nervously. “The fact is that I realized before it
was too late that I had made a mistake, and had just enough presence
of mind to say so. That is all my extraordinary conduct amounts
to.”

“All it amounts to, indeed,” he retorted, quivering with rage but
keeping himself in hand, for he felt she might be setting another
trap. “Speaking as a private individual, in a purely informal
conversation, I admired your conduct, and I was delighted when our
warm-hearted students garlanded you. But, like Mr. Fielding, I am
surprised; indeed, surprise is too weak a word. I see you drag my
best friend into the dirt, damage his health and ruin his prospects
in a way you cannot conceive owing to your ignorance of our society
and religion, and then suddenly you get up in the witness-box: ‘Oh
no, Mr. McBryde, after all I am not quite sure, you may as well
let him go.’ Am I mad? I keep asking myself. Is it a dream, and if
so, when did it start? And without doubt it is a dream that has
not yet finished. For I gather you have not done with us yet, and
it is now the turn of the poor old guide who conducted you round
the caves.”

“Not at all, we were only discussing possibilities,” interposed
Fielding.

“An interesting pastime, but a lengthy one. There are one hundred
and seventy million Indians in this notable peninsula, and of
course one or other of them entered the cave. Of course some Indian
is the culprit, we must never doubt that. And since, my dear
Fielding, these possibilities will take you some time”—here he put
his arm over the Englishman’s shoulder and swayed him to and fro
gently—“don’t you think you had better come out to the Nawab
Bahadur’s—or I should say to Mr. Zulfiqar’s, for that is the name
he now requires us to call him by.”

“Gladly, in a minute . . .”

“I have just settled my movements,” said Miss Quested. “I shall go
to the Dak Bungalow.”

“Not the Turtons’?” said Hamidullah, goggle-eyed. “I thought you
were their guest.”

The Dak Bungalow of Chandrapore was below the average, and certainly
servantless. Fielding, though he continued to sway with Hamidullah,
was thinking on independent lines, and said in a moment: “I have
a better idea than that, Miss Quested. You must stop here at the
College. I shall be away at least two days, and you can have the
place entirely to yourself, and make your plans at your convenience.”

“I don’t agree at all,” said Hamidullah, with every symptom of
dismay. “The idea is a thoroughly bad one. There may quite well be
another demonstration to-night, and suppose an attack is made on
the College. You would be held responsible for this lady’s safety,
my dear fellow.”

“They might equally attack the Dak Bungalow.”

“Exactly, but the responsibility there ceases to be yours.”

“Quite so. I have given trouble enough.”

“Do you hear? The lady admits it herself. It’s not an attack from
our people I fear—you should see their orderly conduct at the
hospital; what we must guard against is an attack secretly arranged
by the police for the purpose of discrediting you. McBryde keeps
plenty of roughs for this purpose, and this would be the very
opportunity for him.”

“Never mind. She is not going to the Dak Bungalow,” said Fielding.
He had a natural sympathy for the down-trodden—that was partly why
he rallied from Aziz—and had become determined not to leave the
poor girl in the lurch. Also, he had a new-born respect for her,
consequent on their talk. Although her hard schoolmistressy manner
remained, she was no longer examining life, but being examined by
it; she had become a real person.

“Then where is she to go? We shall never have done with her!” For
Miss Quested had not appealed to Hamidullah. If she had shown
emotion in court, broke down, beat her breast, and invoked the name
of God, she would have summoned forth his imagination and
generosity—he had plenty of both. But while relieving the Oriental
mind, she had chilled it, with the result that he could scarcely
believe she was sincere, and indeed from his standpoint she was
not. For her behaviour rested on cold justice and honesty; she had
felt, while she recanted, no passion of love for those whom she
had wronged. Truth is not truth in that exacting land unless there
go with it kindness and more kindness and kindness again, unless
the Word that was with God also is God. And the girl’s sacrifice—so
creditable according to Western notions—was rightly rejected,
because, though it came from her heart, it did not include her
heart. A few garlands from students was all that India ever gave
her in return.

“But where is she to have her dinner, where is she to sleep? I say
here, here, and if she is hit on the head by roughs, she is hit on
the head. That is my contribution. Well, Miss Quested?”

“You are very kind. I should have said yes, I think, but I agree
with Mr. Hamidullah. I must give no more trouble to you. I believe
my best plan is to return to the Turtons, and see if they will
allow me to sleep, and if they turn me away I must go to the Dak.
The Collector would take me in, I know, but Mrs. Turton said this
morning that she would never see me again.” She spoke without
bitterness, or, as Hamidullah thought, without proper pride. Her
aim was to cause the minimum of annoyance.

“Far better stop here than expose yourself to insults from that
preposterous woman.”

“Do you find her preposterous? I used to. I don’t now.”

“Well, here’s our solution,” said the barrister, who had terminated
his slightly minatory caress and strolled to the window. “Here
comes the City Magistrate. He comes in a third-class band-ghari
for purposes of disguise, he comes unattended, but here comes the
City Magistrate.”

“At last,” said Adela sharply, which caused Fielding to glance at
her.

“He comes, he comes, he comes. I cringe. I tremble.”

“Will you ask him what he wants, Mr. Fielding?”

“He wants you, of course.”

“He may not even know I’m here.”

“I’ll see him first, if you prefer.”

When he had gone, Hamidullah said to her bitingly: “Really, really.
Need you have exposed Mr. Fielding to this further discomfort? He
is far too considerate.” She made no reply, and there was complete
silence between them until their host returned.

“He has some news for you,” he said. “You’ll find him on the
verandah. He prefers not to come in.”

“Does he tell me to come out to him?”

“Whether he tells you or not, you will go, I think,” said
Hamidullah.

She paused, then said, “Perfectly right,” and then said a few words
of thanks to the Principal for his kindness to her during the day.

“Thank goodness, that’s over,” he remarked, not escorting her to
the verandah, for he held it unnecessary to see Ronny again.

“It was insulting of him not to come in.”

“He couldn’t very well after my behaviour to him at the Club.
Heaslop doesn’t come out badly. Besides, Fate has treated him
pretty roughly to-day. He has had a cable to the effect that his
mother’s dead, poor old soul.”

“Oh, really. Mrs. Moore. I’m sorry,” said Hamidullah rather
indifferently.

“She died at sea.”

“The heat, I suppose.”

“Presumably.”

“May is no month to allow an old lady to travel in.”

“Quite so. Heaslop ought never to have let her go, and he knows
it. Shall we be off?”

“Let us wait until the happy couple leave the compound clear . . .
they really are intolerable dawdling there. Ah well, Fielding,
you don’t believe in Providence, I remember. I do. This is Heaslop’s
punishment for abducting our witness in order to stop us establishing
our alibi.”

“You go rather too far there. The poor old lady’s evidence could
have had no value, shout and shriek Mahmoud Ali as he will. She
couldn’t see through the Kawa Dol even if she had wanted to. Only
Miss Quested could have saved him.”

“She loved Aziz, he says, also India, and he loved her.”

“Love is of no value in a witness, as a barrister ought to know.
But I see there is about to be an Esmiss Esmoor legend at
Chandrapore, my dear Hamidullah, and I will not impede its growth.”

The other smiled, and looked at his watch. They both regretted the
death, but they were middle-aged men, who had invested their
emotions elsewhere, and outbursts of grief could not be expected
from them over a slight acquaintance. It’s only one’s own dead who
matter. If for a moment the sense of communion in sorrow came to
them, it passed. How indeed is it possible for one human being to
be sorry for all the sadness that meets him on the face of the
earth, for the pain that is endured not only by men, but by animals
and plants, and perhaps by the stones? The soul is tired in a
moment, and in fear of losing the little she does understand, she
retreats to the permanent lines which habit or chance have dictated,
and suffers there. Fielding had met the dead woman only two or
three times, Hamidullah had seen her in the distance once, and they
were far more occupied with the coming gathering at Dilkusha, the
“victory” dinner, for which they would be most victoriously late.

They agreed not to tell Aziz about Mrs. Moore till the morrow,
because he was fond of her, and the bad news might spoil his fun.

“Oh, this is unbearable!” muttered Hamidullah. For Miss Quested
was back again.

“Mr. Fielding, has Ronny told you of this new misfortune?”

He bowed.

“Ah me!” She sat down, and seemed to stiffen into a monument.

“Heaslop is waiting for you, I think.”

“I do so long to be alone. She was my best friend, far more to me
than to him. I can’t bear to be with Ronny . . . I can’t explain
. . . Could you do me the very great kindness of letting me stop
after all?”

Hamidullah swore violently in the vernacular.

“I should be pleased, but does Mr. Heaslop wish it?”

“I didn’t ask him, we are too much upset—it’s so complex, not like
what unhappiness is supposed to be. Each of us ought to be alone,
and think. Do come and see Ronny again.”

“I think he should come in this time,” said Fielding, feeling that
this much was due to his own dignity. “Do ask him to come.”

She returned with him. He was half miserable, half arrogant—indeed,
a strange mix-up—and broke at once into uneven speech. “I came to
bring Miss Quested away, but her visit to the Turtons has ended,
and there is no other arrangement so far, mine are bachelor quarters
now——”

Fielding stopped him courteously. “Say no more, Miss Quested stops
here. I only wanted to be assured of your approval. Miss Quested,
you had better send for your own servant if he can be found, but
I will leave orders with mine to do all they can for you, also I’ll
let the Scouts know. They have guarded the College ever since it
was closed, and may as well go on. I really think you’ll be as safe
here as anywhere. I shall be back Thursday.”

Meanwhile Hamidullah, determined to spare the enemy no incidental
pain, had said to Ronny: “We hear, sir, that your mother has died.
May we ask where the cable came from?”

“Aden.”

“Ah, you were boasting she had reached Aden, in court.”

“But she died on leaving Bombay,” broke in Adela. “She was dead
when they called her name this morning. She must have been buried
at sea.”

Somehow this stopped Hamidullah, and he desisted from his brutality,
which had shocked Fielding more than anyone else. He remained
silent while the details of Miss Quested’s occupation of the
College were arranged, merely remarking to Ronny, “It is clearly
to be understood, sir, that neither Mr. Fielding nor any of us are
responsible for this lady’s safety at Government College,” to which
Ronny agreed. After that, he watched the semi-chivalrous behavings
of the three English with quiet amusement; he thought Fielding had
been incredibly silly and weak, and he was amazed by the younger
people’s want of proper pride. When they were driving out to
Dilkusha, hours late, he said to Amritrao, who accompanied them:
“Mr. Amritrao, have you considered what sum Miss Quested ought to
pay as compensation?”

“Twenty thousand rupees.”

No more was then said, but the remark horrified Fielding. He
couldn’t bear to think of the queer honest girl losing her money
and possibly her young man too. She advanced into his consciousness
suddenly. And, fatigued by the merciless and enormous day, he lost
his usual sane view of human intercourse, and felt that we exist
not in ourselves, but in terms of each others’ minds—a notion for
which logic offers no support and which had attacked him only once
before, the evening after the catastrophe, when from the verandah
of the club he saw the fists and fingers of the Marabar swell until
they included the whole night sky.




  CHAPTER XXVII


“Aziz, are you awake?”

“No, so let us have a talk; let us dream plans for the future.”

“I am useless at dreaming.”

“Good night then, dear fellow.”

The Victory Banquet was over, and the revellers lay on the roof of
plain Mr. Zulfiqar’s mansion, asleep, or gazing through mosquito
nets at the stars. Exactly above their heads hung the constellation
of the Lion, the disc of Regulus so large and bright that it
resembled a tunnel, and when this fancy was accepted all the other
stars seemed tunnels too.

“Are you content with our day’s work, Cyril?” the voice on his left
continued.

“Are you?”

“Except that I ate too much. ‘How is stomach, how head?’—I say,
Panna Lal and Callendar ’ll get the sack.”

“There’ll be a general move at Chandrapore.”

“And you’ll get promotion.”

“They can’t well move me down, whatever their feelings.”

“In any case we spend our holidays together, and visit Kashmir,
possibly Persia, for I shall have plenty of money. Paid to me on
account of the injury sustained by my character,” he explained with
cynical calm. “While with me you shall never spend a single pie.
This is what I have always wished, and as the result of my
misfortunes it has come.”

“You have won a great victory . . .” began Fielding.

“I know, my dear chap, I know; your voice need not become so solemn
and anxious. I know what you are going to say next: Let, oh let
Miss Quested off paying, so that the English may say, ‘Here is a
native who has actually behaved like a gentleman; if it was not
for his black face we would almost allow him to join our club.’
The approval of your compatriots no longer interests me, I have
become anti-British, and ought to have done so sooner, it would
have saved me numerous misfortunes.”

“Including knowing me.”

“I say, shall we go and pour water on to Mohammed Latif’s face? He
is so funny when this is done to him asleep.”

The remark was not a question but a full-stop. Fielding accepted
it as such and there was a pause, pleasantly filled by a little
wind which managed to brush the top of the house. The banquet,
though riotous, had been agreeable, and now the blessings of
leisure—unknown to the West, which either works or idles—descended
on the motley company. Civilization strays about like a ghost here,
revisiting the ruins of empire, and is to be found not in great
works of art or mighty deeds, but in the gestures well-bred Indians
make when they sit or lie down. Fielding, who had dressed up in
native costume, learnt from his excessive awkwardness in it that
all his motions were makeshifts, whereas when the Nawab Bahadur
stretched out his hand for food or Nureddin applauded a song,
something beautiful had been accomplished which needed no
development. This restfulness of gesture—it is the Peace that
passeth Understanding, after all, it is the social equivalent of
Yoga. When the whirring of action ceases, it becomes visible, and
reveals a civilization which the West can disturb but will never
acquire. The hand stretches out for ever, the lifted knee has the
eternity though not the sadness of the grave. Aziz was full of
civilization this evening, complete, dignified, rather hard, and
it was with diffidence that the other said: “Yes, certainly you
must let off Miss Quested easily. She must pay all your costs, that
is only fair, but do not treat her like a conquered enemy.”

“Is she wealthy? I depute you to find out.”

“The sums mentioned at dinner when you all got so excited—they
would ruin her, they are perfectly preposterous. Look here . . .”

“I am looking, though it gets a bit dark. I see Cyril Fielding to
be a very nice chap indeed and my best friend, but in some ways a
fool. You think that by letting Miss Quested off easily I shall
make a better reputation for myself and Indians generally. No, no.
It will be put down to weakness and the attempt to gain promotion
officially. I have decided to have nothing more to do with British
India, as a matter of fact. I shall seek service in some Moslem
State, such as Hyderabad, Bhopal, where Englishmen cannot insult
me any more. Don’t counsel me otherwise.”

“In the course of a long talk with Miss Quested . . .”

“I don’t want to hear your long talks.”

“Be quiet. In the course of a long talk with Miss Quested I have
begun to understand her character. It’s not an easy one, she being
a prig. But she is perfectly genuine and very brave. When she saw
she was wrong, she pulled herself up with a jerk and said so. I
want you to realize what that means. All her friends around her,
the entire British Raj pushing her forward. She stops, sends the
whole thing to smithereens. In her place I should have funked it.
But she stopped, and almost did she become a national heroine, but
my students ran us down a side street before the crowd caught
flame. Do treat her considerately. She really mustn’t get the worst
of both worlds. I know what all these”—he indicated the shrouded
forms on the roof—“will want, but you mustn’t listen to them. Be
merciful. Act like one of your six Mogul Emperors, or all the six
rolled into one.”

“Not even Mogul Emperors showed mercy until they received an
apology.”

“She’ll apologize if that’s the trouble,” he cried, sitting up.
“Look, I’ll make you an offer. Dictate to me whatever form of words
you like, and this time to-morrow I’ll bring it back signed. This
is not instead of any public apology she may make you in law. It’s
an addition.”

“‘Dear Dr. Aziz, I wish you had come into the cave; I am an awful
old hag, and it is my last chance.’ Will she sign that?”

“Well good night, good night, it’s time to go to sleep, after
that.”

“Good night, I suppose it is.”

“Oh, I wish you wouldn’t make that kind of remark,” he continued
after a pause. “It is the one thing in you I can’t put up with.”

“I put up with all things in you, so what is to be done?”

“Well, you hurt me by saying it; good night.”

There was silence, then dreamily but with deep feeling the voice
said: “Cyril, I have had an idea which will satisfy your tender
mind: I shall consult Mrs. Moore.” Opening his eyes, and beholding
thousands of stars, he could not reply, they silenced him.

“Her opinion will solve everything; I can trust her so absolutely.
If she advises me to pardon this girl, I shall do so. She will
counsel me nothing against my real and true honour, as you might.”

“Let us discuss that to-morrow morning.”

“Is it not strange? I keep on forgetting she has left India. During
the shouting of her name in court I fancied she was present. I had
shut my eyes, I confused myself on purpose to deaden the pain. Now
this very instant I forgot again. I shall be obliged to write. She
is now far away, well on her way towards Ralph and Stella.”

“To whom?”

“To those other children.”

“I have not heard of other children.”

“Just as I have two boys and a girl, so has Mrs. Moore. She told
me in the mosque.”

“I knew her so slightly.”

“I have seen her but three times, but I know she is an Oriental.”

“You are so fantastic. . . . Miss Quested, you won’t treat her
generously; while over Mrs. Moore there is this elaborate chivalry.
Miss Quested anyhow behaved decently this morning, whereas the old
lady never did anything for you at all, and it’s pure conjecture
that she would have come forward in your favour, it only rests on
servants’ gossip. Your emotions never seem in proportion to their
objects, Aziz.”

“Is emotion a sack of potatoes, so much the pound, to be measured
out? Am I a machine? I shall be told I can use up my emotions by
using them, next.”

“I should have thought you could. It sounds common sense. You can’t
eat your cake and have it, even in the world of the spirit.”

“If you are right, there is no point in any friendship; it all
comes down to give and take, or give and return, which is
disgusting, and we had better all leap over this parapet and kill
ourselves. Is anything wrong with you this evening that you grow
so materialistic?”

“Your unfairness is worse than my materialism.”

“I see. Anything further to complain of?” He was good-tempered and
affectionate but a little formidable. Imprisonment had made channels
for his character, which would never fluctuate as widely now as in
the past. “Because it is far better you put all your difficulties
before me, if we are to be friends for ever. You do not like Mrs.
Moore, and are annoyed because I do; however, you will like her in
time.”

When a person, really dead, is supposed to be alive, an unhealthiness
infects the conversation. Fielding could not stand the tension any
longer and blurted out: “I’m sorry to say Mrs. Moore’s dead.”

But Hamidullah, who had been listening to all their talk, and did
not want the festive evening spoilt, cried from the adjoining bed:
“Aziz, he is trying to pull your leg; don’t believe him, the
villain.”

“I do not believe him,” said Aziz; he was inured to practical
jokes, even of this type.

Fielding said no more. Facts are facts, and everyone would learn
of Mrs. Moore’s death in the morning. But it struck him that people
are not really dead until they are felt to be dead. As long as
there is some misunderstanding about them, they possess a sort of
immortality. An experience of his own confirmed this. Many years
ago he had lost a great friend, a woman, who believed in the
Christian heaven, and assured him that after the changes and
chances of this mortal life they would meet in it again. Fielding
was a blank, frank atheist, but he respected every opinion his
friend held: to do this is essential in friendship. And it seemed
to him for a time that the dead awaited him, and when the illusion
faded it left behind it an emptiness that was almost guilt: “This
really is the end,” he thought, “and I gave her the final blow.”
He had tried to kill Mrs. Moore this evening, on the roof of the
Nawab Bahadur’s house; but she still eluded him, and the atmosphere
remained tranquil. Presently the moon rose—the exhausted crescent
that precedes the sun—and shortly after men and oxen began their
interminable labour, and the gracious interlude, which he had tried
to curtail, came to its natural conclusion.




  CHAPTER XXVIII


Dead she was—committed to the deep while still on the southward
track, for the boats from Bombay cannot point towards Europe until
Arabia has been rounded; she was further in the tropics than ever
achieved while on shore, when the sun touched her for the last time
and her body was lowered into yet another India—the Indian Ocean.
She left behind her sore discomfort, for a death gives a ship a
bad name. Who was this Mrs. Moore? When Aden was reached, Lady
Mellanby cabled, wrote, did all that was kind, but the wife of a
Lieutenant-Governor does not bargain for such an experience; and
she repeated: “I had only seen the poor creature for a few hours
when she was taken ill; really this has been needlessly distressing,
it spoils one’s home-coming.” A ghost followed the ship up the Red
Sea, but failed to enter the Mediterranean. Somewhere about Suez
there is always a social change: the arrangements of Asia weaken
and those of Europe begin to be felt, and during the transition
Mrs. Moore was shaken off. At Port Said the grey blustery north
began. The weather was so cold and bracing that the passengers felt
it must have broken in the land they had left, but it became hotter
steadily there in accordance with its usual law.

The death took subtler and more lasting shapes in Chandrapore. A
legend sprang up that an Englishman had killed his mother for
trying to save an Indian’s life—and there was just enough truth in
this to cause annoyance to the authorities. Sometimes it was a cow
that had been killed—or a crocodile with the tusks of a boar had
crawled out of the Ganges. Nonsense of this type is more difficult
to combat than a solid lie. It hides in rubbish heaps and moves
when no one is looking. At one period two distinct tombs containing
Esmiss Esmoor’s remains were reported: one by the tannery, the
other up near the goods station. Mr. McBryde visited them both and
saw signs of the beginning of a cult—earthenware saucers and so
on. Being an experienced official, he did nothing to irritate it,
and after a week or so, the rash died down. “There’s propaganda
behind all this,” he said, forgetting that a hundred years ago,
when Europeans still made their home in the country-side and
appealed to its imagination, they occasionally became local demons
after death—not a whole god, perhaps, but part of one, adding an
epithet or gesture to what already existed, just as the gods
contribute to the great gods, and they to the philosophic Brahm.

Ronny reminded himself that his mother had left India at her own
wish, but his conscience was not clear. He had behaved badly to
her, and he had either to repent (which involved a mental overturn),
or to persist in unkindness towards her. He chose the latter
course. How tiresome she had been with her patronage of Aziz! What
a bad influence upon Adela! And now she still gave trouble with
ridiculous “tombs,” mixing herself up with natives. She could not
help it, of course, but she had attempted similar exasperating
expeditions in her lifetime, and he reckoned it against her. The
young man had much to worry him—the heat, the local tension, the
approaching visit of the Lieutenant-Governor, the problems of
Adela—and threading them all together into a grotesque garland were
these Indianizations of Mrs. Moore. What does happen to one’s
mother when she dies? Presumably she goes to heaven, anyhow she
clears out. Ronny’s religion was of the sterilized Public School
brand, which never goes bad, even in the tropics. Wherever he
entered, mosque, cave, or temple, he retained the spiritual outlook
of the Fifth Form, and condemned as “weakening” any attempt to
understand them. Pulling himself together, he dismissed the mater
from his mind. In due time he and his half-brother and -sister
would put up a tablet to her in the Northamptonshire church where
she had worshipped, recording the dates of her birth and death and
the fact that she had been buried at sea. This would be sufficient.

And Adela—she would have to depart too; he hoped she would have
made the suggestion herself ere now. He really could not marry
her—it would mean the end of his career. Poor lamentable Adela. . . .
She remained at Government College, by Fielding’s
courtesy—unsuitable and humiliating, but no one would receive her
at the civil station. He postponed all private talk until the award
against her was decided. Aziz was suing her for damages in the
sub-judge’s court. Then he would ask her to release him. She had
killed his love, and it had never been very robust; they would
never have achieved betrothal but for the accident to the Nawab
Bahadur’s car. She belonged to the callow academic period of his
life which he had outgrown—Grasmere, serious talks and walks, that
sort of thing.




CHAPTER XXIX


The visit of the Lieutenant-Governor of the Province formed the
next stage in the decomposition of the Marabar. Sir Gilbert, though
not an enlightened man, held enlightened opinions. Exempted by a
long career in the Secretariate from personal contact with the
peoples of India, he was able to speak of them urbanely, and to
deplore racial prejudice. He applauded the outcome of the trial,
and congratulated Fielding on having taken “the broad, the sensible,
the only possible charitable view from the first. Speaking
confidentially . . .” he proceeded. Fielding deprecated confidences,
but Sir Gilbert insisted on imparting them; the affair had been
“mishandled by certain of our friends up the hill” who did not
realize that “the hands of the clock move forward, not back,” etc.,
etc. One thing he could guarantee: the Principal would receive a
most cordial invitation to rejoin the club, and he begged, nay
commanded him, to accept. He returned to his Himalayan altitudes
well satisfied; the amount of money Miss Quested would have to pay,
the precise nature of what had happened in the caves—these were
local details, and did not concern him.

Fielding found himself drawn more and more into Miss Quested’s
affairs. The College remained closed and he ate and slept at
Hamidullah’s, so there was no reason she should not stop on if she
wished. In her place he would have cleared out, sooner than submit
to Ronny’s half-hearted and distracted civilities, but she was
waiting for the hour-glass of her sojourn to run through. A house
to live in, a garden to walk in during the brief moment of the
cool—that was all she asked, and he was able to provide them.
Disaster had shown her her limitations, and he realized now what
a fine loyal character she was. Her humility was touching. She
never repined at getting the worst of both worlds; she regarded it
as the due punishment of her stupidity. When he hinted to her that
a personal apology to Aziz might be seemly, she said sadly: “Of
course. I ought to have thought of it myself, my instincts never
help me. Why didn’t I rush up to him after the trial? Yes, of
course I will write him an apology, but please will you dictate
it?” Between them they concocted a letter, sincere, and full of
moving phrases, but it was not moving as a letter. “Shall I write
another?” she enquired. “Nothing matters if I can undo the harm I
have caused. I can do this right, and that right; but when the two
are put together they come wrong. That’s the defect of my character.
I have never realized it until now. I thought that if I was just
and asked questions I would come through every difficulty.” He
replied: “Our letter is a failure for a simple reason which we had
better face: you have no real affection for Aziz, or Indians
generally.” She assented. “The first time I saw you, you were
wanting to see India, not Indians, and it occurred to me: Ah, that
won’t take us far. Indians know whether they are liked or not—they
cannot be fooled here. Justice never satisfies them, and that is
why the British Empire rests on sand.” Then she said: “Do I like
anyone, though?” Presumably she liked Heaslop, and he changed the
subject, for this side of her life did not concern him.

His Indian friends were, on the other hand, a bit above themselves.
Victory, which would have made the English sanctimonious, made them
aggressive. They wanted to develop an offensive, and tried to do
so by discovering new grievances and wrongs, many of which had no
existence. They suffered from the usual disillusion that attends
warfare. The aims of battle and the fruits of conquest are never
the same; the latter have their value and only the saint rejects
them, but their hint of immortality vanishes as soon as they are
held in the hand. Although Sir Gilbert had been courteous, almost
obsequious, the fabric he represented had in no wise bowed its
head. British officialism remained, as all-pervading and as
unpleasant as the sun; and what was next to be done against it was
not very obvious, even to Mahmoud Ali. Loud talk and trivial
lawlessness were attempted, and behind them continued a genuine
but vague desire for education. “Mr. Fielding, we must all be
educated promptly.”

Aziz was friendly and domineering. He wanted Fielding to “give in
to the East,” as he called it, and live in a condition of
affectionate dependence upon it. “You can trust me, Cyril.” No
question of that, and Fielding had no roots among his own people.
Yet he really couldn’t become a sort of Mohammed Latif. When they
argued about it something racial intruded—not bitterly, but
inevitably, like the colour of their skins: coffee-colour versus
pinko-grey. And Aziz would conclude: “Can’t you see that I’m
grateful to you for your help and want to reward you?” And the
other would retort: “If you want to reward me, let Miss Quested
off paying.”

The insensitiveness about Adela displeased him. It would, from
every point of view, be right to treat her generously, and one day
he had the notion of appealing to the memory of Mrs. Moore. Aziz
had this high and fantastic estimate of Mrs. Moore. Her death had
been a real grief to his warm heart; he wept like a child and
ordered his three children to weep also. There was no doubt that
he respected and loved her. Fielding’s first attempt was a failure.
The reply was: “I see your trick. I want revenge on them. Why
should I be insulted and suffer and the contents of my pockets read
and my wife’s photograph taken to the police station? Also I want
the money—to educate my little boys, as I explained to her.” But
he began to weaken, and Fielding was not ashamed to practise a
little necromancy. Whenever the question of compensation came up,
he introduced the dead woman’s name. Just as other propagandists
invented her a tomb, so did he raise a questionable image of her
in the heart of Aziz, saying nothing that he believed to be untrue,
but producing something that was probably far from the truth. Aziz
yielded suddenly. He felt it was Mrs. Moore’s wish that he should
spare the woman who was about to marry her son, that it was the
only honour he could pay her, and he renounced with a passionate
and beautiful outburst the whole of the compensation money, claiming
only costs. It was fine of him, and, as he foresaw, it won him no
credit with the English. They still believed he was guilty, they
believed it to the end of their careers, and retired Anglo-Indians
in Tunbridge Wells or Cheltenham still murmur to each other: “That
Marabar case which broke down because the poor girl couldn’t face
giving her evidence—that was another bad case.”

When the affair was thus officially ended, Ronny, who was about to
be transferred to another part of the Province, approached Fielding
with his usual constraint and said: “I wish to thank you for the
help you have given Miss Quested. She will not of course trespass
on your hospitality further; she has as a matter of fact decided
to return to England. I have just arranged about her passage for
her. I understand she would like to see you.”

“I shall go round at once.”

On reaching the College, he found her in some upset. He learnt that
the engagement had been broken by Ronny. “Far wiser of him,” she
said pathetically. “I ought to have spoken myself, but I drifted
on wondering what would happen. I would willingly have gone on
spoiling his life through inertia—one has nothing to do, one
belongs nowhere and becomes a public nuisance without realizing
it.” In order to reassure him, she added: “I speak only of India.
I am not astray in England. I fit in there—no, don’t think I shall
do harm in England. When I am forced back there, I shall settle
down to some career. I have sufficient money left to start myself,
and heaps of friends of my own type. I shall be quite all right.”
Then sighing: “But oh, the trouble I’ve brought on everyone here. . . .
I can never get over it. My carefulness as to whether we
should marry or not . . . and in the end Ronny and I part and
aren’t even sorry. We ought never to have thought of marriage.
Weren’t you amazed when our engagement was originally announced?”

“Not much. At my age one’s seldom amazed,” he said, smiling.
“Marriage is too absurd in any case. It begins and continues for
such very slight reasons. The social business props it up on one
side, and the theological business on the other, but neither of
them are marriage, are they? I’ve friends who can’t remember why
they married, no more can their wives. I suspect that it mostly
happens haphazard, though afterwards various noble reasons are
invented. About marriage I am cynical.”

“I am not. This false start has been all my own fault. I was
bringing to Ronny nothing that ought to be brought, that was why
he rejected me really. I entered that cave thinking: Am I fond of
him? I have not yet told you that, Mr. Fielding. I didn’t feel
justified. Tenderness, respect, personal intercourse—I tried to
make them take the place—of——”

“I no longer want love,” he said, supplying the word.

“No more do I. My experiences here have cured me. But I want others
to want it.”

“But to go back to our first talk (for I suppose this is our last
one)—when you entered that cave, who did follow you, or did no one
follow you? Can you now say? I don’t like it left in air.”

“Let us call it the guide,” she said indifferently. “It will never
be known. It’s as if I ran my finger along that polished wall in
the dark, and cannot get further. I am up against something, and
so are you. Mrs. Moore—she did know.”

“How could she have known what we don’t?”

“Telepathy, possibly.”

The pert, meagre word fell to the ground. Telepathy? What an
explanation! Better withdraw it, and Adela did so. She was at the
end of her spiritual tether, and so was he. Were there worlds
beyond which they could never touch, or did all that is possible
enter their consciousness? They could not tell. They only realized
that their outlook was more or less similar, and found in this a
satisfaction. Perhaps life is a mystery, not a muddle; they could
not tell. Perhaps the hundred Indias which fuss and squabble so
tiresomely are one, and the universe they mirror is one. They had
not the apparatus for judging.

“Write to me when you get to England.”

“I shall, often. You have been excessively kind. Now that I’m
going, I realize it. I wish I could do something for you in return,
but I see you’ve all you want.”

“I think so,” he replied after a pause. “I have never felt more
happy and secure out here. I really do get on with Indians, and
they do trust me. It’s pleasant that I haven’t had to resign my
job. It’s pleasant to be praised by an L.-G. Until the next
earthquake I remain as I am.”

“Of course this death has been troubling me.”

“Aziz was so fond of her too.”

“But it has made me remember that we must all die: all these
personal relations we try to live by are temporary. I used to feel
death selected people, it is a notion one gets from novels, because
some of the characters are usually left talking at the end. Now
‘death spares no one’ begins to be real.”

“Don’t let it become too real, or you’ll die yourself. That is the
objection to meditating upon death. We are subdued to what we work
in. I have felt the same temptation, and had to sheer off. I want
to go on living a bit.”

“So do I.”

A friendliness, as of dwarfs shaking hands, was in the air. Both
man and woman were at the height of their powers—sensible, honest,
even subtle. They spoke the same language, and held the same
opinions, and the variety of age and sex did not divide them. Yet
they were dissatisfied. When they agreed, “I want to go on living
a bit,” or, “I don’t believe in God,” the words were followed by
a curious backwash as though the universe had displaced itself to
fill up a tiny void, or as though they had seen their own gestures
from an immense height—dwarfs talking, shaking hands and assuring
each other that they stood on the same footing of insight. They
did not think they were wrong, because as soon as honest people
think they are wrong instability sets up. Not for them was an
infinite goal behind the stars, and they never sought it. But
wistfulness descended on them now, as on other occasions; the
shadow of the shadow of a dream fell over their clear-cut interests,
and objects never seen again seemed messages from another world.

“And I do like you so very much, if I may say so,” he affirmed.

“I’m glad, for I like you. Let’s meet again.”

“We will, in England, if I ever take home leave.”

“But I suppose you’re not likely to do that yet.”

“Quite a chance. I have a scheme on now as a matter of fact.”

“Oh, that would be very nice.”

So it petered out. Ten days later Adela went off, by the same route
as her dead friend. The final beat up before the monsoon had come.
The country was stricken and blurred. Its houses, trees and fields
were all modelled out of the same brown paste, and the sea at
Bombay slid about like broth against the quays. Her last Indian
adventure was with Antony, who followed her on to the boat and
tried to blackmail her. She had been Mr. Fielding’s mistress,
Antony said. Perhaps Antony was discontented with his tip. She rang
the cabin bell and had him turned out, but his statement created
rather a scandal, and people did not speak to her much during the
first part of the voyage. Through the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea
she was left to herself, and to the dregs of Chandrapore.

With Egypt the atmosphere altered. The clean sands, heaped on each
side of the canal, seemed to wipe off everything that was difficult
and equivocal, and even Port Said looked pure and charming in the
light of a rose-grey morning. She went on shore there with an
American missionary, they walked out to the Lesseps statue, they
drank the tonic air of the Levant. “To what duties, Miss Quested,
are you returning in your own country after your taste of the
tropics?” the missionary asked.

“Observe, I don’t say to what do you turn, but to what do you
_re_-turn. Every life ought to contain both a turn and a _re_-turn.
This celebrated pioneer (he pointed to the statue) will make my
question clear. He turns to the East, he _re_-turns to the West.
You can see it from the cute position of his hands, one of which
holds a string of sausages.” The missionary looked at her
humorously, in order to cover the emptiness of his mind. He had no
idea what he meant by “turn” and “return,” but he often used words
in pairs, for the sake of moral brightness. “I see,” she replied.
Suddenly, in the Mediterranean clarity, she had seen. Her first
duty on returning to England was to look up those other children
of Mrs. Moore’s, Ralph and Stella, then she would turn to her
profession. Mrs. Moore had tended to keep the products of her two
marriages apart, and Adela had not come across the younger branch
so far.




  CHAPTER XXX


Another local consequence of the trial was a Hindu-Moslem entente.
Loud protestations of amity were exchanged by prominent citizens,
and there went with them a genuine desire for a good understanding.
Aziz, when he was at the hospital one day, received a visit from
rather a sympathetic figure: Mr. Das. The magistrate sought two
favours from him: a remedy for shingles and a poem for his
brother-in-law’s new monthly magazine. He accorded both.

“My dear Das, why, when you tried to send me to prison, should I
try to send Mr. Bhattacharya a poem? Eh? That is naturally entirely
a joke. I will write him the best I can, but I thought your magazine
was for Hindus.”

“It is not for Hindus, but Indians generally,” he said timidly.

“There is no such person in existence as the general Indian.”

“There was not, but there may be when you have written a poem. You
are our hero; the whole city is behind you, irrespective of creed.”

“I know, but will it last?”

“I fear not,” said Das, who had much mental clearness. “And for
that reason, if I may say so, do not introduce too many Persian
expressions into the poem, and not too much about the bulbul.”

“Half a sec,” said Aziz, biting his pencil. He was writing out a
prescription. “Here you are. . . . Is not this better than a poem?”

“Happy the man who can compose both.”

“You are full of compliments to-day.”

“I know you bear me a grudge for trying that case,” said the other,
stretching out his hand impulsively. “You are so kind and friendly,
but always I detect irony beneath your manner.”

“No, no, what nonsense!” protested Aziz. They shook hands, in a
half-embrace that typified the entente. Between people of distant
climes there is always the possibility of romance, but the various
branches of Indians know too much about each other to surmount the
unknowable easily. The approach is prosaic. “Excellent,” said Aziz,
patting a stout shoulder and thinking, “I wish they did not remind
me of cow-dung”; Das thought, “Some Moslems are very violent.” They
smiled wistfully, each spying the thought in the other’s heart,
and Das, the more articulate, said: “Excuse my mistakes, realize
my limitations. Life is not easy as we know it on the earth.”

“Oh, well, about this poem—how did you hear I sometimes scribbled?”
he asked, much pleased, and a good deal moved—for literature had
always been a solace to him, something that the ugliness of facts
could not spoil.

“Professor Godbole often mentioned it, before his departure for
Mau.”

“How did he hear?”

“He too was a poet; do you not divine each other?”

Flattered by the invitation, he got to work that evening. The feel
of the pen between his fingers generated bulbuls at once. His poem
was again about the decay of Islam and the brevity of love; as sad
and sweet as he could contrive, but not nourished by personal
experience, and of no interest to these excellent Hindus. Feeling
dissatisfied, he rushed to the other extreme, and wrote a satire,
which was too libellous to print. He could only express pathos or
venom, though most of his life had no concern with either. He loved
poetry—science was merely an acquisition, which he laid aside when
unobserved like his European dress—and this evening he longed to
compose a new song which should be acclaimed by multitudes and even
sung in the fields. In what language shall it be written? And what
shall it announce? He vowed to see more of Indians who were not
Mohammedans, and never to look backward. It is the only healthy
course. Of what help, in this latitude and hour, are the glories
of Cordova and Samarcand? They have gone, and while we lament them
the English occupy Delhi and exclude us from East Africa. Islam
itself, though true, throws cross-lights over the path to freedom.
The song of the future must transcend creed.

The poem for Mr. Bhattacharya never got written, but it had an
effect. It led him towards the vague and bulky figure of a
mother-land. He was without natural affection for the land of his
birth, but the Marabar Hills drove him to it. Half closing his
eyes, he attempted to love India. She must imitate Japan. Not until
she is a nation will her sons be treated with respect. He grew
harder and less approachable. The English, whom he had laughed at
or ignored, persecuted him everywhere; they had even thrown nets
over his dreams. “My great mistake has been taking our rulers as
a joke,” he said to Hamidullah next day; who replied with a sigh:
“It is far the wisest way to take them, but not possible in the
long run. Sooner or later a disaster such as yours occurs, and
reveals their secret thoughts about our character. If God himself
descended from heaven into their club and said you were innocent,
they would disbelieve him. Now you see why Mahmoud Ali and self
waste so much time over intrigues and associate with creatures like
Ram Chand.”

“I cannot endure committees. I shall go right away.”

“Where to? Turtons and Burtons, all are the same.”

“But not in an Indian state.”

“I believe the Politicals are obliged to have better manners. It
amounts to no more.”

“I do want to get away from British India, even to a poor job. I
think I could write poetry there. I wish I had lived in Babur’s
time and fought and written for him. Gone, gone, and not even any
use to say ‘Gone, gone,’ for it weakens us while we say it. We need
a king, Hamidullah; it would make our lives easier. As it is, we
must try to appreciate these quaint Hindus. My notion now is to
try for some post as doctor in one of their states.”

“Oh, that is going much too far.”

“It is not going as far as Mr. Ram Chand.”

“But the money, the money—they will never pay an adequate salary,
those savage Rajahs.”

“I shall never be rich anywhere, it is outside my character.”

“If you had been sensible and made Miss Quested pay——”

“I chose not to. Discussion of the past is useless,” he said, with
sudden sharpness of tone. “I have allowed her to keep her fortune
and buy herself a husband in England, for which it will be very
necessary. Don’t mention the matter again.”

“Very well, but your life must continue a poor man’s; no holidays
in Kashmir for you yet, you must stick to your profession and rise
to a highly paid post, not retire to a jungle-state and write
poems. Educate your children, read the latest scientific periodicals,
compel European doctors to respect you. Accept the consequences of
your own actions like a man.”

Aziz winked at him slowly and said: “We are not in the law courts.
There are many ways of being a man; mine is to express what is
deepest in my heart.”

“To such a remark there is certainly no reply,” said Hamidullah,
moved. Recovering himself and smiling, he said: “Have you heard
this naughty rumour that Mohammed Latif has got hold of?”

“Which?”

“When Miss Quested stopped in the College, Fielding used to visit
her . . . rather too late in the evening, the servants say.”

“A pleasant change for her if he did,” said Aziz, making a curious
face.

“But you understand my meaning?”

The young man winked again and said: “Just! Still, your meaning
doesn’t help me out of my difficulties. I am determined to leave
Chandrapore. The problem is, for where? I am determined to write
poetry. The problem is, about what? You give me no assistance.”
Then, surprising both Hamidullah and himself, he had an explosion
of nerves. “But who does give me assistance? No one is my friend.
All are traitors, even my own children. I have had enough of
friends.”

“I was going to suggest we go behind the purdah, but your three
treacherous children are there, so you will not want to.”

“I am sorry, it is ever since I was in prison my temper is strange;
take me, forgive me.”

“Nureddin’s mother is visiting my wife now. That is all right, I
think.”

“They come before me separately, but not so far together. You had
better prepare them for the united shock of my face.”

“No, let us surprise them without warning, far too much nonsense
still goes on among our ladies. They pretended at the time of your
trial they would give up purdah; indeed, those of them who can
write composed a document to that effect, and now it ends in
humbug. You know how deeply they all respect Fielding, but not one
of them has seen him. My wife says she will, but always when he
calls there is some excuse—she is not feeling well, she is ashamed
of the room, she has no nice sweets to offer him, only Elephants’
Ears, and if I say Elephants’ Ears are Mr. Fielding’s favourite
sweet, she replies that he will know how badly hers are made, so
she cannot see him on their account. For fifteen years, my dear
boy, have I argued with my begum, for fifteen years, and never
gained a point, yet the missionaries inform us our women are
down-trodden. If you want a subject for a poem, take this: The
Indian lady as she is and not as she is supposed to be.”




  CHAPTER XXXI


Aziz had no sense of evidence. The sequence of his emotions decided
his beliefs, and led to the tragic coolness between himself and
his English friend. They had conquered but were not to be crowned.
Fielding was away at a conference, and after the rumour about Miss
Quested had been with him undisturbed for a few days, he assumed
it was true. He had no objection on moral grounds to his friends
amusing themselves, and Cyril, being middle-aged, could no longer
expect the pick of the female market, and must take his amusement
where he could find it. But he resented him making up to this
particular woman, whom he still regarded as his enemy; also, why
had he not been told? What is friendship without confidences? He
himself had told things sometimes regarded as shocking, and the
Englishman had listened, tolerant, but surrendering nothing in
return.

He met Fielding at the railway station on his return, agreed to
dine with him, and then started taxing him by the oblique method,
outwardly merry. An avowed European scandal there was—Mr. McBryde
and Miss Derek. Miss Derek’s faithful attachment to Chandrapore
was now explained: Mr. McBryde had been caught in her room, and
his wife was divorcing him. “That pure-minded fellow. However, he
will blame the Indian climate. Everything is our fault really. Now,
have I not discovered an important piece of news for you, Cyril?”

“Not very,” said Fielding, who took little interest in distant
sins. “Listen to mine.” Aziz’ face lit up. “At the conference, it
was settled. . . .”

“This evening will do for schoolmastery. I should go straight to
the Minto now, the cholera looks bad. We begin to have local cases
as well as imported. In fact, the whole of life is somewhat sad.
The new Civil Surgeon is the same as the last, but does not yet
dare to be. That is all any administrative change amounts to. All
my suffering has won nothing for us. But look here, Cyril, while
I remember it. There’s gossip about you as well as McBryde. They
say that you and Miss Quested became also rather too intimate
friends. To speak perfectly frankly, they say you and she have been
guilty of impropriety.”

“They would say that.”

“It’s all over the town, and may injure your reputation. You know,
everyone is by no means your supporter. I have tried all I could
to silence such a story.”

“Don’t bother. Miss Quested has cleared out at last.”

“It is those who stop in the country, not those who leave it, whom
such a story injures. Imagine my dismay and anxiety. I could
scarcely get a wink of sleep. First my name was coupled with her
and now it is yours.”

“Don’t use such exaggerated phrases.”

“As what?”

“As dismay and anxiety.”

“Have I not lived all my life in India? Do I not know what produces
a bad impression here?” His voice shot up rather crossly.

“Yes, but the scale, the scale. You always get the scale wrong, my
dear fellow. A pity there is this rumour, but such a very small
pity—so small that we may as well talk of something else.”

“You mind for Miss Quested’s sake, though. I can see from your
face.”

“As far as I do mind. I travel light.”

“Cyril, that boastfulness about travelling light will be your ruin.
It is raising up enemies against you on all sides, and makes me
feel excessively uneasy.”

“What enemies?”

Since Aziz had only himself in mind, he could not reply. Feeling
a fool, he became angrier. “I have given you list after list of
the people who cannot be trusted in this city. In your position I
should have the sense to know I was surrounded by enemies. You
observe I speak in a low voice. It is because I see your sais is
new. How do I know he isn’t a spy?” He lowered his voice: “Every
third servant is a spy.”

“Now, what is the matter?” he asked, smiling.

“Do you contradict my last remark?”

“It simply doesn’t affect me. Spies are as thick as mosquitoes,
but it’s years before I shall meet the one that kills me. You’ve
something else in your mind.”

“I’ve not; don’t be ridiculous.”

“You have. You’re cross with me about something or other.”

Any direct attack threw him out of action. Presently he said: “So
you and Madamsell Adela used to amuse one another in the evening,
naughty boy.”

Those drab and high-minded talks had scarcely made for dalliance.
Fielding was so startled at the story being taken seriously, and
so disliked being called a naughty boy, that he lost his head and
cried: “You little rotter! Well, I’m damned. Amusement indeed. Is
it likely at such a time?”

“Oh, I beg your pardon, I’m sure. The licentious Oriental
imagination was at work,” he replied, speaking gaily, but cut to
the heart; for hours after his mistake he bled inwardly.

“You see, Aziz, the circumstances . . . also the girl was still
engaged to Heaslop, also I never felt . . .”

“Yes, yes; but you didn’t contradict what I said, so I thought it
was true. Oh dear, East and West. Most misleading. Will you please
put your little rotter down at his hospital?”

“You’re not offended?”

“Most certainly I am not.”

“If you are, this must be cleared up later on.”

“It has been,” he answered, dignified. “I believe absolutely what
you say, and of that there need be no further question.”

“But the way I said it must be cleared up. I was unintentionally
rude. Unreserved regrets.”

“The fault is entirely mine.”

Tangles like this still interrupted their intercourse. A pause in
the wrong place, an intonation misunderstood, and a whole
conversation went awry. Fielding had been startled, not shocked,
but how convey the difference? There is always trouble when two
people do not think of sex at the same moment, always mutual
resentment and surprise, even when the two people are of the same
race. He began to recapitulate his feelings about Miss Quested.
Aziz cut him short with: “But I believe you, I believe. Mohammed
Latif shall be severely punished for inventing this.”

“Oh, leave it alone, like all gossip—it’s merely one of those
half-alive things that try to crowd out real life. Take no notice,
it’ll vanish, like poor old Mrs. Moore’s tombs.”

“Mohammed Latif has taken to intriguing. We are already much
displeased with him. Will it satisfy you if we send him back to
his family without a present?”

“We’ll discuss M.L. at dinner.”

His eyes went clotted and hard. “Dinner. This is most unlucky—— I
forgot. I have promised to dine with Das.”

“Bring Das to me.”

“He will have invited other friends.”

“You are coming to dinner with me as arranged,” said Fielding,
looking away. “I don’t stand this. You are coming to dinner with
me. You come.”

They had reached the hospital now. Fielding continued round the
Maidan alone. He was annoyed with himself, but counted on dinner
to pull things straight. At the post office he saw the Collector.
Their vehicles were parked side by side while their servants
competed in the interior of the building. “Good morning; so you
are back,” said Turton icily. “I should be glad if you will put in
your appearance at the club this evening.”

“I have accepted re-election, sir. Do you regard it as necessary
I should come? I should be glad to be excused; indeed, I have a
dinner engagement this evening.”

“It is not a question of your feelings, but of the wish of the
Lieutenant-Governor. Perhaps you will ask me whether I speak
officially. I do. I shall expect you this evening at six. We shall
not interfere with your subsequent plans.”

He attended the grim little function in due course. The skeletons
of hospitality rattled—“Have a peg, have a drink.” He talked for
five minutes to Mrs. Blakiston, who was the only surviving female.
He talked to McBryde, who was defiant about his divorce, conscious
that he had sinned as a sahib. He talked to Major Roberts, the new
Civil Surgeon; and to young Milner, the new City Magistrate; but
the more the club changed, the more it promised to be the same
thing. “It is no good,” he thought, as he returned past the mosque,
“we all build upon sand; and the more modern the country gets, the
worse’ll be the crash. In the old eighteenth century, when cruelty
and injustice raged, an invisible power repaired their ravages.
Everything echoes now; there’s no stopping the echo. The original
sound may be harmless, but the echo is always evil.” This reflection
about an echo lay at the verge of Fielding’s mind. He could never
develop it. It belonged to the universe that he had missed or
rejected. And the mosque missed it too. Like himself, those shallow
arcades provided but a limited asylum. “There is no God but God”
doesn’t carry us far through the complexities of matter and spirit;
it is only a game with words, really, a religious pun, not a
religious truth.

He found Aziz overtired and dispirited, and he determined not to
allude to their misunderstanding until the end of the evening; it
would be more acceptable then. He made a clean breast about the
club—said he had only gone under compulsion, and should never
attend again unless the order was renewed. “In other words, probably
never; for I am going quite soon to England.”

“I thought you might end in England,” he said very quietly, then
changed the conversation. Rather awkwardly they ate their dinner,
then went out to sit in the Mogul garden-house.

“I am only going for a little time. On official business. My
service is anxious to get me away from Chandrapore for a bit. It
is obliged to value me highly, but does not care for me. The
situation is somewhat humorous.”

“What is the nature of the business? Will it leave you much spare
time?”

“Enough to see my friends.”

“I expected you to make such a reply. You are a faithful friend.
Shall we now talk about something else?”

“Willingly. What subject?”

“Poetry,” he said, with tears in his eyes. “Let us discuss why
poetry has lost the power of making men brave. My mother’s father
was also a poet, and fought against you in the Mutiny. I might
equal him if there was another mutiny. As it is, I am a doctor,
who has won a case and has three children to support, and whose
chief subject of conversation is official plans.”

“Let us talk about poetry.” He turned his mind to the innocuous
subject. “You people are sadly circumstanced. Whatever are you to
write about? You cannot say, ‘The rose is faded,’ for evermore. We
know it’s faded. Yet you can’t have patriotic poetry of the ‘India,
my India’ type, when it’s nobody’s India.”

“I like this conversation. It may lead to something interesting.”

“You are quite right in thinking that poetry must touch life. When
I knew you first, you used it as an incantation.”

“I was a child when you knew me first. Everyone was my friend then.
The Friend: a Persian expression for God. But I do not want to be
a religious poet either.”

“I hoped you would be.”

“Why, when you yourself are an atheist?”

“There is something in religion that may not be true, but has not
yet been sung.”

“Explain in detail.”

“Something that the Hindus have perhaps found.”

“Let them sing it.”

“Hindus are unable to sing.”

“Cyril, you sometimes make a sensible remark. That will do for
poetry for the present. Let us now return to your English visit.”

“We haven’t discussed poetry for two seconds,” said the other,
smiling.

But Aziz was addicted to cameos. He held the tiny conversation in
his hand, and felt it epitomized his problem. For an instant he
recalled his wife, and, as happens when a memory is intense, the
past became the future, and he saw her with him in a quiet Hindu
jungle native state, far away from foreigners. He said: “I suppose
you will visit Miss Quested.”

“If I have time. It will be strange seeing her in Hampstead.”

“What is Hampstead?”

“An artistic and thoughtful little suburb of London——”

“And there she lives in comfort: you will enjoy seeing her. . . .
Dear me, I’ve got a headache this evening. Perhaps I am going to
have cholera. With your permission, I’ll leave early.”

“When would you like the carriage?”

“Don’t trouble—I’ll bike.”

“But you haven’t got your bicycle. My carriage fetched you—let it
take you away.”

“Sound reasoning,” he said, trying to be gay. “I have not got my
bicycle. But I am seen too often in your carriage. I am thought to
take advantage of your generosity by Mr. Ram Chand.” He was out of
sorts and uneasy. The conversation jumped from topic to topic in
a broken-backed fashion. They were affectionate and intimate, but
nothing clicked tight.

“Aziz, you have forgiven me the stupid remark I made this morning?”

“When you called me a little rotter?”

“Yes, to my eternal confusion. You know how fond I am of you.”

“That is nothing, of course, we all of us make mistakes. In a
friendship such as ours a few slips are of no consequence.”

But as he drove off, something depressed him—a dull pain of body
or mind, waiting to rise to the surface. When he reached the
bungalow he wanted to return and say something very affectionate;
instead, he gave the sais a heavy tip, and sat down gloomily on
the bed, and Hassan massaged him incompetently. The eye-flies had
colonized the top of an almeira; the red stains on the durry were
thicker, for Mohammed Latif had slept here during his imprisonment
and spat a good deal; the table drawer was scarred where the police
had forced it open; everything in Chandrapore was used up, including
the air. The trouble rose to the surface now: he was suspicious;
he suspected his friend of intending to marry Miss Quested for the
sake of her money, and of going to England for that purpose.

“Huzoor?”—for he had muttered.

“Look at those flies on the ceiling. Why have you not drowned
them?”

“Huzoor, they return.”

“Like all evil things.”

To divert the conversation, Hassan related how the kitchen-boy had
killed a snake, good, but killed it by cutting it in two, bad,
because it becomes two snakes.

“When he breaks a plate, does it become two plates?”

“Glasses and a new teapot will similarly be required, also for
myself a coat.”

Aziz sighed. Each for himself. One man needs a coat, another a rich
wife; each approaches his goal by a clever detour. Fielding had
saved the girl a fine of twenty thousand rupees, and now followed
her to England. If he desired to marry her, all was explained; she
would bring him a larger dowry. Aziz did not believe his own
suspicions—better if he had, for then he would have denounced and
cleared the situation up. Suspicion and belief could in his mind
exist side by side. They sprang from different sources, and need
never intermingle. Suspicion in the Oriental is a sort of malignant
tumour, a mental malady, that makes him self-conscious and
unfriendly suddenly; he trusts and mistrusts at the same time in
a way the Westerner cannot comprehend. It is his demon, as the
Westerner’s is hypocrisy. Aziz was seized by it, and his fancy
built a satanic castle, of which the foundation had been laid when
he talked at Dilkusha under the stars. The girl had surely been
Cyril’s mistress when she stopped in the College—Mohammed Latif
was right. But was that all? Perhaps it was Cyril who followed her
into the cave. . . . No; impossible. Cyril hadn’t been on the Kawa
Dol at all. Impossible. Ridiculous. Yet the fancy left him trembling
with misery. Such treachery—if true—would have been the worst in
Indian history; nothing so vile, not even the murder of Afzul Khan
by Sivaji. He was shaken, as though by a truth, and told Hassan to
leave him.

Next day he decided to take his children back to Mussoorie. They
had come down for the trial, that he might bid them farewell, and
had stayed on at Hamidullah’s for the rejoicings. Major Roberts
would give him leave, and during his absence Fielding would go off
to England. The idea suited both his beliefs and his suspicions.
Events would prove which was right, and preserve, in either case,
his dignity.

Fielding was conscious of something hostile, and because he was
really fond of Aziz his optimism failed him. Travelling light is
less easy as soon as affection is involved. Unable to jog forward
in the serene hope that all would come right, he wrote an elaborate
letter in the rather modern style: “It is on my mind that you think
me a prude about women. I had rather you thought anything else of
me. If I live impeccably now, it is only because I am well on the
forties—a period of revision. In the eighties I shall revise again.
And before the nineties come—I shall be revised! But, alive or
dead, I am absolutely devoid of morals. Do kindly grasp this about
me.” Aziz did not care for the letter at all. It hurt his delicacy.
He liked confidences, however gross, but generalizations and
comparisons always repelled him. Life is not a scientific manual.
He replied coldly, regretting his inability to return from Mussoorie
before his friend sailed: “But I must take my poor little holiday
while I can. All must be economy henceforward, all hopes of Kashmir
have vanished for ever and ever. When you return I shall be slaving
far away in some new post.”

And Fielding went, and in the last gutterings of Chandrapore—heaven
and earth both looking like toffee—the Indian’s bad fancies were
confirmed. His friends encouraged them, for though they had liked
the Principal, they felt uneasy at his getting to know so much
about their private affairs. Mahmoud Ali soon declared that
treachery was afoot. Hamidullah murmured, “Certainly of late he no
longer addressed us with his former frankness,” and warned Aziz
“not to expect too much—he and she are, after all, both members of
another race.” “Where are my twenty thousand rupees?” he thought.
He was absolutely indifferent to money—not merely generous with
it, but promptly paying his debts when he could remember to do
so—yet these rupees haunted his mind, because he had been tricked
about them, and allowed them to escape overseas, like so much of
the wealth of India. Cyril would marry Miss Quested—he grew certain
of it, all the unexplained residue of the Marabar contributing. It
was the natural conclusion of the horrible senseless picnic, and
before long he persuaded himself that the wedding had actually
taken place.




  CHAPTER XXXII


Egypt was charming—a green strip of carpet and walking up and down
it four sorts of animals and one sort of man. Fielding’s business
took him there for a few days. He re-embarked at Alexandria—bright
blue sky, constant wind, clean low coast-line, as against the
intricacies of Bombay. Crete welcomed him next with the long snowy
ridge of its mountains, and then came Venice. As he landed on the
piazzetta a cup of beauty was lifted to his lips, and he drank with
a sense of disloyalty. The buildings of Venice, like the mountains
of Crete and the fields of Egypt, stood in the right place, whereas
in poor India everything was placed wrong. He had forgotten the
beauty of form among idol temples and lumpy hills; indeed, without
form, how can there be beauty? Form stammered here and there in a
mosque, became rigid through nervousness even, but oh these Italian
churches! San Giorgio standing on the island which could scarcely
have risen from the waves without it, the Salute holding the
entrance of a canal which, but for it, would not be the Grand
Canal! In the old undergraduate days he had wrapped himself up in
the many-coloured blanket of St. Mark’s, but something more precious
than mosaics and marbles was offered to him now: the harmony
between the works of man and the earth that upholds them, the
civilization that has escaped muddle, the spirit in a reasonable
form, with flesh and blood subsisting. Writing picture post-cards
to his Indian friends, he felt that all of them would miss the joys
he experienced now, the joys of form, and that this constituted a
serious barrier. They would see the sumptuousness of Venice, not
its shape, and though Venice was not Europe, it was part of the
Mediterranean harmony. The Mediterranean is the human norm. When
men leave that exquisite lake, whether through the Bosphorus or
the Pillars of Hercules, they approach the monstrous and
extraordinary; and the southern exit leads to the strangest
experience of all. Turning his back on it yet again, he took the
train northward, and tender romantic fancies that he thought were
dead for ever, flowered when he saw the buttercups and daisies of
June.




  PART III: TEMPLE


  CHAPTER XXXIII


Some hundreds of miles westward of the Marabar Hills, and two years
later in time, Professor Narayan Godbole stands in the presence of
God. God is not born yet—that will occur at midnight—but He has
also been born centuries ago, nor can He ever be born, because He
is the Lord of the Universe, who transcends human processes. He
is, was not, is not, was. He and Professor Godbole stood at opposite
ends of the same strip of carpet.

  “Tukaram, Tukaram,
   Thou art my father and mother and everybody.
   Tukaram, Tukaram,
   Thou art my father and mother and everybody.
   Tukaram, Tukaram,
   Thou art my father and mother and everybody.
   Tukaram, Tukaram,
   Thou art my father and mother and everybody.
   Tukaram. . . .”

This corridor in the palace at Mau opened through other corridors
into a courtyard. It was of beautiful hard white stucco, but its
pillars and vaulting could scarcely be seen behind coloured rags,
iridescent balls, chandeliers of opaque pink glass, and murky
photographs framed crookedly. At the end was the small but famous
shrine of the dynastic cult, and the God to be born was largely a
silver image the size of a teaspoon. Hindus sat on either side of
the carpet where they could find room, or overflowed into the
adjoining corridors and the courtyard—Hindus, Hindus only,
mild-featured men, mostly villagers, for whom anything outside
their villages passed in a dream. They were the toiling ryot, whom
some call the real India. Mixed with them sat a few tradesmen out
of the little town, officials, courtiers, scions of the ruling
house. Schoolboys kept inefficient order. The assembly was in a
tender, happy state unknown to an English crowd, it seethed like
a beneficent potion. When the villagers broke cordon for a glimpse
of the silver image, a most beautiful and radiant expression came
into their faces, a beauty in which there was nothing personal,
for it caused them all to resemble one another during the moment
of its indwelling, and only when it was withdrawn did they revert
to individual clods. And so with the music. Music there was, but
from so many sources that the sum-total was untrammelled. The
braying banging crooning melted into a single mass which trailed
round the palace before joining the thunder. Rain fell at intervals
throughout the night.

It was the turn of Professor Godbole’s choir. As Minister of
Education, he gained this special honour. When the previous group
of singers dispersed into the crowd, he pressed forward from the
back, already in full voice, that the chain of sacred sounds might
be uninterrupted. He was barefoot and in white, he wore a pale blue
turban; his gold pince-nez had caught in a jasmine garland, and
lay sideways down his nose. He and the six colleagues who supported
him clashed their cymbals, hit small drums, droned upon a portable
harmonium, and sang:

   “Tukaram, Tukaram,
    Thou art my father and mother and everybody.
    Tukaram, Tukaram,
    Thou art my father and mother and everybody.
    Tukaram, Tukaram. . . .”

They sang not even to the God who confronted them, but to a saint;
they did not one thing which the non-Hindu would feel dramatically
correct; this approaching triumph of India was a muddle (as we call
it), a frustration of reason and form. Where was the God Himself,
in whose honour the congregation had gathered? Indistinguishable
in the jumble of His own altar, huddled out of sight amid images
of inferior descent, smothered under rose-leaves, overhung by
oleographs, outblazed by golden tablets representing the Rajah’s
ancestors, and entirely obscured, when the wind blew, by the
tattered foliage of a banana. Hundreds of electric lights had been
lit in His honour (worked by an engine whose thumps destroyed the
rhythm of the hymn). Yet His face could not be seen. Hundreds of
His silver dishes were piled around Him with the minimum of effect.
The inscriptions which the poets of the State had composed were
hung where they could not be read, or had twitched their drawing-pins
out of the stucco, and one of them (composed in English to indicate
His universality) consisted, by an unfortunate slip of the
draughtsman, of the words, “God si Love.”

God si Love. Is this the first message of India?

  “Tukaram, Tukaram . . .,”

continued the choir, reinforced by a squabble behind the purdah
curtain, where two mothers tried to push their children at the same
moment to the front. A little girl’s leg shot out like an eel. In
the courtyard, drenched by the rain, the small Europeanized band
stumbled off into a waltz. “Nights of Gladness” they were playing.
The singers were not perturbed by this rival, they lived beyond
competition. It was long before the tiny fragment of Professor
Godbole that attended to outside things decided that his pince-nez
was in trouble, and that until it was adjusted he could not choose
a new hymn. He laid down one cymbal, with the other he clashed the
air, with his free hand he fumbled at the flowers round his neck.
A colleague assisted him. Singing into one another’s grey
moustaches, they disentangled the chain from the tinsel into which
it had sunk. Godbole consulted the music-book, said a word to the
drummer, who broke rhythm, made a thick little blur of sound, and
produced a new rhythm. This was more exciting, the inner images it
evoked more definite, and the singers’ expressions became fatuous
and languid. They loved all men, the whole universe, and scraps of
their past, tiny splinters of detail, emerged for a moment to melt
into the universal warmth. Thus Godbole, though she was not
important to him, remembered an old woman he had met in Chandrapore
days. Chance brought her into his mind while it was in this heated
state, he did not select her, she happened to occur among the
throng of soliciting images, a tiny splinter, and he impelled her
by his spiritual force to that place where completeness can be
found. Completeness, not reconstruction. His senses grew thinner,
he remembered a wasp seen he forgot where, perhaps on a stone. He
loved the wasp equally, he impelled it likewise, he was imitating
God. And the stone where the wasp clung—could he . . . no, he could
not, he had been wrong to attempt the stone, logic and conscious
effort had seduced, he came back to the strip of red carpet and
discovered that he was dancing upon it. Up and down, a third of
the way to the altar and back again, clashing his cymbals, his
little legs twinkling, his companions dancing with him and each
other. Noise, noise, the Europeanized band louder, incense on the
altar, sweat, the blaze of lights, wind in the bananas, noise,
thunder, eleven-fifty by his wrist-watch, seen as he threw up his
hands and detached the tiny reverberation that was his soul. Louder
shouts in the crowd. He danced on. The boys and men who were
squatting in the aisles were lifted forcibly and dropped without
changing their shapes into the laps of their neighbours. Down the
path thus cleared advanced a litter. It was the aged ruler of the
state, brought against the advice of his physicians to witness the
Birth ceremony.

No one greeted the Rajah, nor did he wish it; this was no moment
for human glory. Nor could the litter be set down, lest it defiled
the temple by becoming a throne. He was lifted out of it while its
feet remained in air, and deposited on the carpet close to the
altar, his immense beard was straightened, his legs tucked under
him, a paper containing red powder was placed in his hand. There
he sat, leaning against a pillar, exhausted with illness, his eyes
magnified by many unshed tears.

He had not to wait long. In a land where all else was unpunctual,
the hour of the Birth was chronometrically observed. Three minutes
before it was due, a Brahman brought forth a model of the village
of Gokul (the Bethlehem in that nebulous story) and placed it in
front of the altar. The model was on a wooden tray about a yard
square; it was of clay, and was gaily blue and white with streamers
and paint. Here, upon a chair too small for him and with a head
too large, sat King Kansa, who is Herod, directing the murder of
some Innocents, and in a corner, similarly proportioned, stood the
father and mother of the Lord, warned to depart in a dream. The
model was not holy, but more than a decoration, for it diverted
men from the actual image of the God, and increased their sacred
bewilderment. Some of the villagers thought the Birth had occurred,
saying with truth that the Lord must have been born, or they could
not see Him. But the clock struck midnight, and simultaneously the
rending note of the conch broke forth, followed by the trumpeting
of elephants; all who had packets of powder threw them at the
altar, and in the rosy dust and incense, and clanging and shouts,
Infinite Love took upon itself the form of Shri Krishna, and saved
the world. All sorrow was annihilated, not only for Indians, but
for foreigners, birds, caves, railways, and the stars; all became
joy, all laughter; there had never been disease nor doubt,
misunderstanding, cruelty, fear. Some jumped in the air, others
flung themselves prone and embraced the bare feet of the universal
lover; the women behind the purdah slapped and shrieked; the little
girl slipped out and danced by herself, her black pigtails flying.
Not an orgy of the body; the tradition of that shrine forbade it.
But the human spirit had tried by a desperate contortion to ravish
the unknown, flinging down science and history in the struggle,
yes, beauty herself. Did it succeed? Books written afterwards say
“Yes.” But how, if there is such an event, can it be remembered
afterwards? How can it be expressed in anything but itself? Not
only from the unbeliever are mysteries hid, but the adept himself
cannot retain them. He may think, if he chooses, that he has been
with God, but as soon as he thinks it, it becomes history, and
falls under the rules of time.

A cobra of papier-mâché now appeared on the carpet, also a wooden
cradle swinging from a frame. Professor Godbole approached the
latter with a red silk napkin in his arms. The napkin was God, not
that it was, and the image remained in the blur of the altar. It
was just a napkin, folded into a shape which indicated a baby’s.
The Professor dandled it and gave it to the Rajah, who, making a
great effort, said, “I name this child Shri Krishna,” and tumbled
it into the cradle. Tears poured from his eyes, because he had seen
the Lord’s salvation. He was too weak to exhibit the silk baby to
his people, his privilege in former years. His attendants lifted
him up, a new path was cleared through the crowd, and he was
carried away to a less sacred part of the palace. There, in a room
accessible to Western science by an outer staircase, his physician,
Dr. Aziz, awaited him. His Hindu physician, who had accompanied
him to the shrine, briefly reported his symptoms. As the ecstasy
receded, the invalid grew fretful. The bumping of the steam engine
that worked the dynamo disturbed him, and he asked for what reason
it had been introduced into his home. They replied that they would
enquire, and administered a sedative.

Down in the sacred corridors, joy had seethed to jollity. It was
their duty to play various games to amuse the newly born God, and
to simulate his sports with the wanton dairymaids of Brindaban.
Butter played a prominent part in these. When the cradle had been
removed, the principal nobles of the state gathered together for
an innocent frolic. They removed their turbans, and one put a lump
of butter on his forehead, and waited for it to slide down his nose
into his mouth. Before it could arrive, another stole up behind
him, snatched the melting morsel, and swallowed it himself. All
laughed exultantly at discovering that the divine sense of humour
coincided with their own. “God si love!” There is fun in heaven.
God can play practical jokes upon Himself, draw chairs away from
beneath His own posteriors, set His own turbans on fire, and steal
His own petticoats when He bathes. By sacrificing good taste, this
worship achieved what Christianity has shirked: the inclusion of
merriment. All spirit as well as all matter must participate in
salvation, and if practical jokes are banned, the circle is
incomplete. Having swallowed the butter, they played another game
which chanced to be graceful: the fondling of Shri Krishna under
the similitude of a child. A pretty red and gold ball is thrown,
and he who catches it chooses a child from the crowd, raises it in
his arms, and carries it round to be caressed. All stroke the
darling creature for the Creator’s sake, and murmur happy words.
The child is restored to his parents, the ball thrown on, and
another child becomes for a moment the World’s Desire. And the Lord
bounds hither and thither through the aisles, chance, and the sport
of chance, irradiating little mortals with His immortality. . . .
When they had played this long enough—and being exempt from boredom,
they played it again and again, they played it again and again—they
took many sticks and hit them together, whack smack, as though they
fought the Pandava wars, and threshed and churned with them, and
later on they hung from the roof of the temple, in a net, a great
black earthenware jar, which was painted here and there with red,
and wreathed with dried figs. Now came a rousing sport. Springing
up, they struck at the jar with their sticks. It cracked, broke,
and a mass of greasy rice and milk poured on to their faces. They
ate and smeared one another’s mouths, and dived between each
other’s legs for what had been pashed upon the carpet. This way
and that spread the divine mess, until the line of schoolboys, who
had somewhat fended off the crowd, broke for their share. The
corridors, the courtyard, were filled with benign confusion. Also
the flies awoke and claimed their share of God’s bounty. There was
no quarrelling, owing to the nature of the gift, for blessed is
the man who confers it on another, he imitates God. And those
“imitations,” those “substitutions,” continued to flicker through
the assembly for many hours, awaking in each man, according to his
capacity, an emotion that he would not have had otherwise. No
definite image survived; at the Birth it was questionable whether
a silver doll or a mud village, or a silk napkin, or an intangible
spirit, or a pious resolution, had been born. Perhaps all these
things! Perhaps none! Perhaps all birth is an allegory! Still, it
was the main event of the religious year. It caused strange
thoughts. Covered with grease and dust, Professor Godbole had once
more developed the life of his spirit. He had, with increasing
vividness, again seen Mrs. Moore, and round her faintly clinging
forms of trouble. He was a Brahman, she Christian, but it made no
difference, it made no difference whether she was a trick of his
memory or a telepathic appeal. It was his duty, as it was his
desire, to place himself in the position of the God and to love
her, and to place himself in her position and to say to the God,
“Come, come, come, come.” This was all he could do. How inadequate!
But each according to his own capacities, and he knew that his own
were small. “One old Englishwoman and one little, little wasp,” he
thought, as he stepped out of the temple into the grey of a pouring
wet morning. “It does not seem much, still it is more than I am
myself.”




  CHAPTER XXXIV


Dr. Aziz left the palace at the same time. As he returned to his
house—which stood in a pleasant garden further up the main street
of the town—he could see his old patron paddling and capering in
the slush ahead. “Hullo!” he called, and it was the wrong remark,
for the devotee indicated by circular gestures of his arms that he
did not desire to be disturbed. He added, “Sorry,” which was right,
for Godbole twisted his head till it didn’t belong to his body,
and said in a strained voice that had no connection with his mind:
“He arrived at the European Guest House perhaps—at least possibly.”

“Did he? Since when?”

But time was too definite. He waved his arm more dimly and
disappeared. Aziz knew who “he” was—Fielding—but he refused to
think about him, because it disturbed his life, and he still
trusted the floods to prevent him from arriving. A fine little
river issued from his garden gate and gave him much hope. It was
impossible that anyone could get across from Deora in such weather
as this. Fielding’s visit was official. He had been transferred
from Chandrapore, and sent on a tour through Central India to see
what the remoter states were doing with regard to English education.
He had married, he had done the expected with Miss Quested, and
Aziz had no wish to see him again.

“Dear old Godbole,” he thought, and smiled. He had no religious
curiosity, and had never discovered the meaning of this annual
antic, but he was well assured that Godbole was a dear old man. He
had come to Mau through him and remained on his account. Without
him he could never have grasped problems so totally different from
those of Chandrapore. For here the cleavage was between Brahman
and non-Brahman; Moslems and English were quite out of the running,
and sometimes not mentioned for days. Since Godbole was a Brahman,
Aziz was one also for purposes of intrigue: they would often joke
about it together. The fissures in the Indian soil are infinite:
Hinduism, so solid from a distance, is riven into sects and clans,
which radiate and join, and change their names according to the
aspect from which they are approached. Study it for years with the
best teachers, and when you raise your head, nothing they have told
you quite fits. Aziz, the day of his inauguration, had remarked:
“I study nothing, I respect”—making an excellent impression. There
was now a minimum of prejudice against him. Nominally under a Hindu
doctor, he was really chief medicine man to the court. He had to
drop inoculation and such Western whims, but even at Chandrapore
his profession had been a game, centring round the operating table,
and here in the backwoods he let his instruments rust, ran his
little hospital at half steam, and caused no undue alarm.

His impulse to escape from the English was sound. They had
frightened him permanently, and there are only two reactions
against fright: to kick and scream on committees, or to retreat to
a remote jungle, where the sahib seldom comes. His old lawyer
friends wanted him to stop in British India and help agitate, and
might have prevailed, but for the treachery of Fielding. The news
had not surprised him in the least. A rift had opened between them
after the trial when Cyril had not joined in his procession; those
advocacies of the girl had increased it; then came the post-cards
from Venice, so cold, so unfriendly that all agreed that something
was wrong; and finally, after a silence, the expected letter from
Hampstead. Mahmoud Ali was with him at the time. “Some news that
will surprise you. I am to marry someone whom you know. . .” He
did not read further. “Here it comes, answer for me——” and he threw
it to Mahmoud Ali. Subsequent letters he destroyed unopened. It
was the end of a foolish experiment. And though sometimes at the
back of his mind he felt that Fielding had made sacrifices for him,
it was now all confused with his genuine hatred of the English. “I
am an Indian at last,” he thought, standing motionless in the rain.

Life passed pleasantly, the climate was healthy so that the children
could be with him all the year round, and he had married again—not
exactly a marriage, but he liked to regard it as one—and he read
his Persian, wrote his poetry, had his horse, and sometimes got
some shikar while the good Hindus looked the other way. His poems
were all on one topic—Oriental womanhood. “The purdah must go,”
was their burden, “otherwise we shall never be free.” And he
declared (fantastically) that India would not have been conquered
if women as well as men had fought at Plassy. “But we do not show
our women to the foreigner”—not explaining how this was to be
managed, for he was writing a poem. Bulbuls and roses would still
persist, the pathos of defeated Islam remained in his blood and
could not be expelled by modernities. Illogical poems—like their
writer. Yet they struck a true note: there cannot be a mother-land
without new homes. In one poem—the only one funny old Godbole
liked—he had skipped over the mother-land (whom he did not truly
love) and gone straight to internationality. “Ah, that is bhakti;
ah, my young friend, that is different and very good. Ah, India,
who seems not to move, will go straight there while the other
nations waste their time. May I translate this particular one into
Hindi? In fact, it might be rendered into Sanskrit almost, it is
so enlightened. Yes, of course, all your other poems are very good
too. His Highness was saying to Colonel Maggs last time he came
that we are proud of you”—simpering slightly.

Colonel Maggs was the Political Agent for the neighbourhood and
Aziz’ dejected opponent. The Criminal Investigation Department kept
an eye on Aziz ever since the trial—they had nothing actionable
against him, but Indians who have been unfortunate must be watched,
and to the end of his life he remained under observation, thanks
to Miss Quested’s mistake. Colonel Maggs learnt with concern that
a suspect was coming to Mau, and, adopting a playful manner,
rallied the old Rajah for permitting a Moslem doctor to approach
his sacred person. A few years ago, the Rajah would have taken the
hint, for the Political Agent then had been a formidable figure,
descending with all the thunders of Empire when it was most
inconvenient, turning the polity inside out, requiring motor-cars
and tiger-hunts, trees cut down that impeded the view from the
Guest House, cows milked in his presence, and generally arrogating
the control of internal affairs. But there had been a change of
policy in high quarters. Local thunders were no longer endorsed,
and the group of little states that composed the agency discovered
this and began comparing notes with fruitful result. To see how
much, or how little, Colonel Maggs would stand, became an agreeable
game at Mau, which was played by all the departments of State. He
had to stand the appointment of Dr. Aziz. The Rajah did not take
the hint, but replied that Hindus were less exclusive than formerly,
thanks to the enlightened commands of the Viceroy, and he felt it
his duty to move with the times.

Yes, all had gone well hitherto, but now, when the rest of the
state was plunged in its festival, he had a crisis of a very
different sort. A note awaited him at his house. There was no doubt
that Fielding had arrived overnight, nor much doubt that Godbole
knew of his arrival, for the note was addressed to him, and he had
read it before sending it on to Aziz, and had written in the
margin, “Is not this delightful news, but unfortunately my religious
duties prevent me from taking any action.” Fielding announced that
he had inspected Mudkul (Miss Derek’s former preserve), that he
had nearly been drowned at Deora, that he had reached Mau according
to time-table, and hoped to remain there two days, studying the
various educational innovations of his old friend. Nor had he come
alone. His wife and her brother accompanied him. And then the note
turned into the sort of note that always did arrive from the State
Guest House. Wanting something. No eggs. Mosquito nets torn. When
would they pay their respects to His Highness? Was it correct that
a torchlight procession would take place? If so, might they view
it? They didn’t want to give trouble, but if they might stand in
a balcony, or if they might go out in a boat. . . . Aziz tore the
note up. He had had enough of showing Miss Quested native life.
Treacherous hideous harridan! Bad people altogether. He hoped to
avoid them, though this might be difficult, for they would certainly
be held up for several days at Mau. Down country, the floods were
even worse, and the pale grey faces of lakes had appeared in the
direction of the Asirgarh railway station.




  CHAPTER XXXV


Long before he discovered Mau, another young Mohammedan had retired
there—a saint. His mother said to him, “Free prisoners.” So he took
a sword and went up to the fort. He unlocked a door, and the
prisoners streamed out and resumed their previous occupations, but
the police were too much annoyed and cut off the young man’s head.
Ignoring its absence, he made his way over the rocks that separate
the fort and the town, killing policemen as he went, and he fell
outside his mother’s house, having accomplished her orders.
Consequently there are two shrines to him to-day—that of the Head
above, and that of the Body below—and they are worshipped by the
few Mohammedans who live near, and by Hindus also. “There is no
God but God”; that symmetrical injunction melts in the mild airs
of Mau; it belongs to pilgrimages and universities, not to feudalism
and agriculture. When Aziz arrived, and found that even Islam was
idolatrous, he grew scornful, and longed to purify the place, like
Alamgir. But soon he didn’t mind, like Akbar. After all, this saint
had freed prisoners, and he himself had lain in prison. The Shrine
of the Body lay in his own garden and produced a weekly crop of
lamps and flowers, and when he saw them he recalled his sufferings.
The Shrine of the Head made a nice short walk for the children. He
was off duty the morning after the great pujah, and he told them
to come. Jemila held his hand. Ahmed and Karim ran in front,
arguing what the body looked like as it came staggering down, and
whether they would have been frightened if they met it. He didn’t
want them to grow up superstitious, so he rebuked them, and they
answered yes father, for they were well brought up, but, like
himself, they were impervious to argument, and after a polite pause
they continued saying what their natures compelled them to say.

A slim, tall eight-sided building stood at the top of the slope,
among some bushes. This was the Shrine of the Head. It had not been
roofed, and was indeed merely a screen. Inside it crouched a humble
dome, and inside that, visible through a grille, was a truncated
gravestone, swathed in calico. The inner angles of the screen were
cumbered with bees’ nests, and a gentle shower of broken wings and
other aerial oddments kept falling, and had strewn the damp pavement
with their flue. Ahmed, apprized by Mohammed Latif of the character
of the bee, said, “They will not hurt us, whose lives are chaste,”
and pushed boldly in; his sister was more cautious. From the shrine
they went to a mosque, which, in size and design, resembled a
fire-screen; the arcades of Chandrapore had shrunk to a flat piece
of ornamental stucco, with protuberances at either end to suggest
minarets. The funny little thing didn’t even stand straight, for
the rock on which it had been put was slipping down the hill. It,
and the shrine, were a strange outcome of the protests of Arabia.

They wandered over the old fort, now deserted, and admired the
various views. The scenery, according to their standards, was
delightful—the sky grey and black, bellyfuls of rain all over it,
the earth pocked with pools of water and slimy with mud. A
magnificent monsoon—the best for three years, the tanks already
full, bumper crops possible. Out towards the river (the route by
which the Fieldings had escaped from Deora) the downpour had been
enormous, the mails had to be pulled across by ropes. They could
just see the break in the forest trees where the gorge came through,
and the rocks above that marked the site of the diamond mine,
glistening with wet. Close beneath was the suburban residence of
the Junior Rani, isolated by floods, and Her Highness, lax about
purdah, to be seen paddling with her handmaidens in the garden and
waving her sari at the monkeys on the roof. But better not look
close beneath, perhaps—nor towards the European Guest House either.
Beyond the Guest House rose another grey-green gloom of hills,
covered with temples like little white flames. There were over two
hundred gods in that direction alone, who visited each other
constantly, and owned numerous cows, and all the betel-leaf
industry, besides having shares in the Asirgarh motor omnibus. Many
of them were in the palace at this moment, having the time of their
lives; others, too large or proud to travel, had sent symbols to
represent them. The air was thick with religion and rain.

Their white shirts fluttering, Ahmed and Karim ran about over the
fort, shrieking with joy. Presently they intersected a line of
prisoners, who were looking aimlessly at an old bronze gun. “Which
of you is to be pardoned?” they asked. For to-night was the
procession of the Chief God, when He would leave the palace,
escorted by the whole power of the State, and pass by the Jail,
which stood down in the town now. As He did so, troubling the
waters of our civilization, one prisoner would be released, and
then He would proceed to the great Mau tank that stretched as far
as the Guest House garden, where something else would happen, some
final or subsidiary apotheosis, after which He would submit to the
experience of sleep. The Aziz family did not grasp as much as this,
being Moslem, but the visit to the Jail was common knowledge.
Smiling, with downcast eyes, the prisoners discussed with the
gentry their chances of salvation. Except for the irons on their
legs, they resembled other men, nor did they feel different. Five
of them, who had not yet been brought to trial, could expect no
pardon, but all who had been convicted were full of hope. They did
not distinguish between the God and the Rajah in their minds, both
were too far above them; but the guard was better educated, and
ventured to enquire after His Highness’s health.

“It always improves,” replied the medicine man. As a matter of
fact, the Rajah was dead, the ceremony overnight had overtaxed his
strength. His death was being concealed lest the glory of the
festival were dimmed. The Hindu physician, the Private Secretary,
and a confidential servant remained with the corpse, while Aziz
had assumed the duty of being seen in public, and misleading
people. He had liked the ruler very much, and might not prosper
under his successor, yet he could not worry over such problems yet,
for he was involved in the illusion he helped to create. The
children continued to run about, hunting for a frog to put in
Mohammed Latif’s bed, the little fools. Hundreds of frogs lived in
their own garden, but they must needs catch one up on the fort.
They reported two topis below. Fielding and his brother-in-law,
instead of resting after their journey, were climbing the slope to
the saint’s tomb!

“Throw stones?” asked Karim.

“Put powdered glass in their pan?”

“Ahmed, come here for such wickedness.” He raised his hand to smite
his firstborn, but allowed it to be kissed instead. It was sweet
to have his sons with him at this moment, and to know they were
affectionate and brave. He pointed out that the Englishmen were
State guests, so must not be poisoned, and received, as always,
gentle yet enthusiastic assent to his words.

The two visitors entered the octagon, but rushed out at once
pursued by some bees. Hither and thither they ran, beating their
heads; the children shrieked with derision, and out of heaven, as
if a plug had been pulled, fell a jolly dollop of rain. Aziz had
not meant to greet his former friend, but the incident put him into
an excellent temper. He felt compact and strong. He shouted out,
“Hullo, gentlemen, are you in trouble?”

The brother-in-law exclaimed; a bee had got him.

“Lie down in a pool of water, my dear sir—here are plenty. Don’t
come near me. . . . I cannot control them, they are State bees;
complain to His Highness of their behaviour.” There was no real
danger, for the rain was increasing. The swarm retired to the
shrine. He went up to the stranger and pulled a couple of stings
out of his wrist, remarking, “Come, pull yourself together and be
a man.”

“How do you do, Aziz, after all this time? I heard you were settled
in here,” Fielding called to him, but not in friendly tones. “I
suppose a couple of stings don’t signify.”

“Not the least. I’ll send an embrocation over to the Guest House.
I heard you were settled in there.”

“Why have you not answered my letters?” he asked, going straight
for the point, but not reaching it, owing to buckets of rain. His
companion, new to the country, cried, as the drops drummed on his
topi, that the bees were renewing their attack. Fielding checked
his antics rather sharply, then said: “Is there a short cut down
to our carriage? We must give up our walk. The weather’s
pestilential.”

“Yes. That way.”

“Are you not coming down yourself?”

Aziz sketched a comic salaam; like all Indians, he was skilful in
the slighter impertinences. “I tremble, I obey,” the gesture said,
and it was not lost upon Fielding. They walked down a rough path
to the road—the two men first; the brother-in-law (boy rather than
man) next, in a state over his arm, which hurt; the three Indian
children last, noisy and impudent—all six wet through.

“How goes it, Aziz?”

“In my usual health.”

“Are you making anything out of your life here?”

“How much do you make out of yours?”

“Who is in charge of the Guest House?” he asked, giving up his
slight effort to recapture their intimacy, and growing more
official; he was older and sterner.

“His Highness’s Private Secretary, probably.”

“Where is he, then?”

“I don’t know.”

“Because not a soul’s been near us since we arrived.”

“Really.”

“I wrote beforehand to the Durbar, and asked if a visit was
convenient. I was told it was, and arranged my tour accordingly;
but the Guest House servants appear to have no definite instructions,
we can’t get any eggs, also my wife wants to go out in the boat.”

“There are two boats.”

“Exactly, and no oars.”

“Colonel Maggs broke the oars when here last.”

“All four?”

“He is a most powerful man.”

“If the weather lifts, we want to see your torchlight procession
from the water this evening,” he pursued. “I wrote to Godbole about
it, but he has taken no notice; it’s a place of the dead.”

“Perhaps your letter never reached the Minister in question.”

“Will there be any objection to English people watching the
procession?”

“I know nothing at all about the religion here. I should never
think of watching it myself.”

“We had a very different reception both at Mudkul and Deora, they
were kindness itself at Deora, the Maharajah and Maharani wanted
us to see everything.”

“You should never have left them.”

“Jump in, Ralph”—they had reached the carriage.

“Jump in, Mr. Quested, and Mr. Fielding.”

“Who on earth is Mr. Quested?”

“Do I mispronounce that well known name? Is he not your wife’s
brother?”

“Who on earth do you suppose I’ve married?”

“I’m only Ralph Moore,” said the boy, blushing, and at that moment
there fell another pailful of the rain, and made a mist round their
feet. Aziz tried to withdraw, but it was too late.

“Quested? Quested? Don’t you know that my wife was Mrs. Moore’s
daughter?”

He trembled, and went purplish grey; he hated the news, hated
hearing the name Moore.

“Perhaps this explains your odd attitude?”

“And pray what is wrong with my attitude?”

“The preposterous letter you allowed Mahmoud Ali to write for you.”

“This is a very useless conversation, I consider.”

“However did you make such a mistake?” said Fielding, more friendly
than before, but scathing and scornful. “It’s almost unbelievable.
I should think I wrote you half a dozen times, mentioning my wife
by name. Miss Quested! What an extraordinary notion!” From his
smile, Aziz guessed that Stella was beautiful. “Miss Quested is
our best friend, she introduced us, but . . . what an amazing
notion. Aziz, we must thrash this misunderstanding out later on.
It is clearly some devilry of Mahmoud Ali’s. He knows perfectly
well I married Miss Moore. He called her ‘Heaslop’s sister’ in his
insolent letter to me.”

The name woke furies in him. “So she is, and here is Heaslop’s
brother, and you his brother-in-law, and good-bye.” Shame turned
into a rage that brought back his self-respect. “What does it
matter to me who you marry? Don’t trouble me here at Mau is all I
ask. I do not want you, I do not want one of you in my private
life, with my dying breath I say it. Yes, yes, I made a foolish
blunder; despise me and feel cold. I thought you married my enemy.
I never read your letter. Mahmoud Ali deceived me. I thought you’d
stolen my money, but”—he clapped his hands together, and his
children gathered round him—“it’s as if you stole it. I forgive
Mahmoud Ali all things, because he loved me.” Then pausing, while
the rain exploded like pistols, he said, “My heart is for my own
people henceforward,” and turned away. Cyril followed him through
the mud, apologizing, laughing a little, wanting to argue and
reconstruct, pointing out with irrefragable logic that he had
married, not Heaslop’s betrothed, but Heaslop’s sister. What
difference did it make at this hour of the day? He had built his
life on a mistake, but he had built it. Speaking in Urdu, that the
children might understand, he said: “Please do not follow us,
whomever you marry. I wish no Englishman or Englishwoman to be my
friend.”

He returned to the house excited and happy. It had been an uneasy,
uncanny moment when Mrs. Moore’s name was mentioned, stirring
memories. “Esmiss Esmoor . . .”—as though she was coming to help
him. She had always been so good, and that youth whom he had
scarcely looked at was her son, Ralph Moore, Stella and Ralph, whom
he had promised to be kind to, and Stella had married Cyril.




  CHAPTER XXXVI


All the time the palace ceased not to thrum and tum-tum. The
revelation was over, but its effect lasted, and its effect was to
make men feel that the revelation had not yet come. Hope existed
despite fulfilment, as it will be in heaven. Although the God had
been born, His procession—loosely supposed by many to be the
birth—had not taken place. In normal years, the middle hours of
this day were signalized by performances of great beauty in the
private apartments of the Rajah. He owned a consecrated troupe of
men and boys, whose duty it was to dance various actions and
meditations of his faith before him. Seated at his ease, he could
witness the Three Steps by which the Saviour ascended the universe
to the discomfiture of Indra, also the death of the dragon, the
mountain that turned into an umbrella, and the saddhu who (with
comic results) invoked the God before dining. All culminated in
the dance of the milkmaidens before Krishna, and in the still
greater dance of Krishna before the milkmaidens, when the music
and the musicians swirled through the dark blue robes of the actors
into their tinsel crowns, and all became one. The Rajah and his
guests would then forget that this was a dramatic performance, and
would worship the actors. Nothing of the sort could occur to-day,
because death interrupts. It interrupted less here than in Europe,
its pathos was less poignant, its irony less cruel. There were two
claimants to the throne, unfortunately, who were in the palace now
and suspected what had happened, yet they made no trouble, because
religion is a living force to the Hindus, and can at certain
moments fling down everything that is petty and temporary in their
natures. The festival flowed on, wild and sincere, and all men
loved each other, and avoided by instinct whatever could cause
inconvenience or pain.

Aziz could not understand this, any more than an average Christian
could. He was puzzled that Mau should suddenly be purged from
suspicion and self-seeking. Although he was an outsider, and
excluded from their rites, they were always particularly charming
to him at this time; he and his household received small courtesies
and presents, just because he was outside. He had nothing to do
all day, except to send the embrocation over to the Guest House,
and towards sunset he remembered it, and looked round his house
for a local palliative, for the dispensary was shut. He found a
tin of ointment belonging to Mohammed Latif, who was unwilling it
should be removed, for magic words had been spoken over it while
it was being boiled down, but Aziz promised that he would bring it
back after application to the stings: he wanted an excuse for a
ride.

The procession was beginning to form as he passed the palace. A
large crowd watched the loading of the State palanquin, the prow
of which protruded in the form of a silver dragon’s head through
the lofty half-opened door. Gods, big and little, were getting
aboard. He averted his eyes, for he never knew how much he was
supposed to see, and nearly collided with the Minister of Education.
“Ah, you might make me late”—meaning that the touch of a non-Hindu
would necessitate another bath; the words were spoken without moral
heat. “Sorry,” said Aziz. The other smiled, and again mentioned
the Guest House party, and when he heard that Fielding’s wife was
not Miss Quested after all, remarked “Ah, no, he married the sister
of Mr. Heaslop. Ah, exactly, I have known that for over a year”—also
without heat. “Why did you not tell me? Your silence plunged me
into a pretty pickle.” Godbole, who had never been known to tell
anyone anything, smiled again, and said in deprecating tones:
“Never be angry with me. I am, as far as my limitations permit,
your true friend; besides, it is my holy festival.” Aziz always
felt like a baby in that strange presence, a baby who unexpectedly
receives a toy. He smiled also, and turned his horse into a lane,
for the crush increased. The Sweepers’ Band was arriving. Playing
on sieves and other emblems of their profession, they marched
straight at the gate of the palace with the air of a victorious
army. All other music was silent, for this was ritually the moment
of the Despised and Rejected; the God could not issue from his
temple until the unclean Sweepers played their tune, they were the
spot of filth without which the spirit cannot cohere. For an
instant the scene was magnificent. The doors were thrown open, and
the whole court was seen inside, barefoot and dressed in white
robes; in the fairway stood the Ark of the Lord, covered with cloth
of gold and flanked by peacock fans and by stiff circular banners
of crimson. It was full to the brim with statuettes and flowers.
As it rose from the earth on the shoulders of its bearers, the
friendly sun of the monsoons shone forth and flooded the world with
colour, so that the yellow tigers painted on the palace walls
seemed to spring, and pink and green skeins of cloud to link up
the upper sky. The palanquin moved. . . . The lane was full of
State elephants, who would follow it, their howdahs empty out of
humility. Aziz did not pay attention to these sanctities, for they
had no connection with his own; he felt bored, slightly cynical,
like his own dear Emperor Babur, who came down from the north and
found in Hindustan no good fruit, no fresh water or witty
conversation, not even a friend.

The lane led quickly out of the town on to high rocks and jungle.
Here he drew reign and examined the great Mau tank, which lay
exposed beneath him to its remotest curve. Reflecting the evening
clouds, it filled the nether-world with an equal splendour, so that
earth and sky leant toward one another, about to clash in ecstasy.
He spat, cynical again, more cynical than before. For in the centre
of the burnished circle a small black blot was advancing—the Guest
House boat. Those English had improvised something to take the
place of oars, and were proceeding in their work of patrolling
India. The sight endeared the Hindus by comparison, and looking
back at the milk-white hump of the palace, he hoped that they would
enjoy carrying their idol about, for at all events it did not pry
into other people’s lives. This pose of “seeing India” which had
seduced him to Miss Quested at Chandrapore was only a form of
ruling India; no sympathy lay behind it; he knew exactly what was
going on in the boat as the party gazed at the steps down which
the image would presently descend, and debated how near they might
row without getting into trouble officially.

He did not give up his ride, for there would be servants at the
Guest House whom he could question; a little information never
comes amiss. He took the path by the sombre promontory that
contained the royal tombs. Like the palace, they were of snowy
stucco, and gleamed by their internal light, but their radiance
grew ghostly under approaching night. The promontory was covered
with lofty trees, and the fruit-bats were unhooking from the boughs
and making kissing sounds as they grazed the surface of the tank;
hanging upside down all the day, they had grown thirsty. The signs
of the contented Indian evening multiplied; frogs on all sides,
cow-dung burning eternally; a flock of belated hornbills overhead,
looking like winged skeletons as they flapped across the gloaming.
There was death in the air, but not sadness; a compromise had been
made between destiny and desire, and even the heart of man
acquiesced.

The European Guest House stood two hundred feet above the water,
on the crest of a rocky and wooded spur that jutted from the
jungle. By the time Aziz arrived, the water had paled to a film of
mauve-grey, and the boat vanished entirely. A sentry slept in the
Guest House porch, lamps burned in the cruciform of the deserted
rooms. He went from one room to another, inquisitive, and malicious.
Two letters lying on the piano rewarded him, and he pounced and
read them promptly. He was not ashamed to do this. The sanctity of
private correspondence has never been ratified by the East.
Moreover, Mr. McBryde had read all his letters in the past, and
spread their contents. One letter—the more interesting of the
two—was from Heaslop to Fielding. It threw light on the mentality
of his former friend, and it hardened him further against him. Much
of it was about Ralph Moore, who appeared to be almost an imbecile.
“Hand on my brother whenever suits you. I write to you because he
is sure to make a bad bunderbust.” Then: “I quite agree—life is
too short to cherish grievances, also I’m relieved you feel able
to come into line with the Oppressors of India to some extent. We
need all the support we can get. I hope that next time Stella comes
my way she will bring you with her, when I will make you as
comfortable as a bachelor can—it’s certainly time we met. My
sister’s marriage to you coming after my mother’s death and my own
difficulties did upset me, and I was unreasonable. It is about time
we made it up properly, as you say—let us leave it at faults on
both sides. Glad about your son and heir. When next any of you
write to Adela, do give her some sort of message from me, for I
should like to make my peace with her too. You are lucky to be out
of British India at the present moment. Incident after incident,
all due to propaganda, but we can’t lay our hands on the connecting
thread. The longer one lives here, the more certain one gets that
everything hangs together. My personal opinion is, it’s the Jews.”

Thus far the red-nosed boy. Aziz was distracted for a moment by
blurred sounds coming from over the water; the procession was under
way. The second letter was from Miss Quested to Mrs. Fielding. It
contained one or two interesting touches. The writer hoped that
“Ralph will enjoy his India more than I did mine,” and appeared to
have given him money for this purpose—“my debt which I shall never
repay in person.” What debt did Miss Quested imagine she owed the
country? He did not relish the phrase. Talk of Ralph’s health. It
was all “Stella and Ralph,” even “Cyril” and “Ronny”—all so friendly
and sensible, and written in a spirit he could not command. He
envied the easy intercourse that is only possible in a nation whose
women are free. These five people were making up their little
difficulties, and closing their broken ranks against the alien.
Even Heaslop was coming in. Hence the strength of England, and in
a spurt of temper he hit the piano, and since the notes had swollen
and stuck together in groups of threes, he produced a remarkable
noise.

“Oh, oh, who is that?” said a nervous and respectful voice; he
could not remember where he had heard its tones before. Something
moved in the twilight of an adjoining room. He replied, “State
doctor, ridden over to enquire, very little English,” slipped the
letters into his pocket, and to show that he had free entry to the
Guest House, struck the piano again.

Ralph Moore came into the light.

What a strange-looking youth, tall, prematurely aged, the big blue
eyes faded with anxiety, the hair impoverished and tousled! Not a
type that is often exported imperially. The doctor in Aziz thought,
“Born of too old a mother,” the poet found him rather beautiful.

“I was unable to call earlier owing to pressure of work. How are
the celebrated bee-stings?” he asked patronizingly.

“I—I was resting, they thought I had better; they throb rather.”

His timidity and evident “newness” had complicated effects on the
malcontent. Speaking threateningly, he said, “Come here, please,
allow me to look.” They were practically alone, and he could treat
the patient as Callendar had treated Nureddin.

“You said this morning——”

“The best of doctors make mistakes. Come here, please, for the
diagnosis under the lamp. I am pressed for time.”

“Aough——”

“What is the matter, pray?”

“Your hands are unkind.”

He started and glanced down at them. The extraordinary youth was
right, and he put them behind his back before replying with outward
anger: “What the devil have my hands to do with you? This is a most
strange remark. I am a qualified doctor, who will not hurt you.”

“I don’t mind pain, there is no pain.”

“No pain?”

“Not really.”

“Excellent news,” sneered Aziz.

“But there is cruelty.”

“I have brought you some salve, but how to put it on in your
present nervous state becomes a problem,” he continued, after a
pause.

“Please leave it with me.”

“Certainly not. It returns to my dispensary at once.” He stretched
forward, and the other retreated to the farther side of a table.
“Now, do you want me to treat your stings, or do you prefer an
English doctor? There is one at Asirgarh. Asirgarh is forty miles
away, and the Ringnod dam broken. Now you see how you are placed.
I think I had better see Mr. Fielding about you; this is really
great nonsense, your present behaviour.”

“They are out in a boat,” he replied, glancing about him for
support.

Aziz feigned intense surprise. “They have not gone in the direction
of Mau, I hope. On a night like this the people become most
fanatical.” And, as if to confirm him, there was a sob, as though
the lips of a giant had parted; the procession was approaching the
Jail.

“You should not treat us like this,” he challenged, and this time
Aziz was checked, for the voice, though frightened, was not weak.

“Like what?”

“Dr. Aziz, we have done you no harm.”

“Aha, you know my name, I see. Yes, I am Aziz. No, of course your
great friend Miss Quested did me no harm at the Marabar.”

Drowning his last words, all the guns of the State went off. A
rocket from the Jail garden gave the signal. The prisoner had been
released, and was kissing the feet of the singers. Rose-leaves fall
from the houses, sacred spices and coco-nut are brought forth. . . .
It was the half-way moment; the God had extended His temple,
and paused exultantly. Mixed and confused in their passage, the
rumours of salvation entered the Guest House. They were startled
and moved on to the porch, drawn by the sudden illumination. The
bronze gun up on the fort kept flashing, the town was a blur of
light, in which the houses seemed dancing, and the palace waving
little wings. The water below, the hills and sky above, were not
involved as yet; there was still only a little light and song
struggling among the shapeless lumps of the universe. The song
became audible through much repetition; the choir was repeating
and inverting the names of deities.

  “Radhakrishna Radhakrishna,
   Radhakrishna Radhakrishna,
   Krishnaradha Radhakrishna,
   Radhakrishna Radhakrishna,”

they sang, and woke the sleeping sentry in the Guest House; he
leant upon his iron-tipped spear.

“I must go back now, good night,” said Aziz, and held out his hand,
completely forgetting that they were not friends, and focusing his
heart on something more distant than the caves, something beautiful.
His hand was taken, and then he remembered how detestable he had
been, and said gently, “Don’t you think me unkind any more?”

“No.”

“How can you tell, you strange fellow?”

“Not difficult, the one thing I always know.”

“Can you always tell whether a stranger is your friend?”

“Yes.”

“Then you are an Oriental.” He unclasped as he spoke, with a little
shudder. Those words—he had said them to Mrs. Moore in the mosque
in the beginning of the cycle, from which, after so much suffering,
he had got free. Never be friends with the English! Mosque, caves,
mosque, caves. And here he was starting again. He handed the magic
ointment to him. “Take this, think of me when you use it. I shall
never want it back. I must give you one little present, and it is
all I have got; you are Mrs. Moore’s son.”

“I am that,” he murmured to himself; and a part of Aziz’ mind that
had been hidden seemed to move and force its way to the top.

“But you are Heaslop’s brother also, and alas, the two nations
cannot be friends.”

“I know. Not yet.”

“Did your mother speak to you about me?”

“Yes.” And with a swerve of voice and body that Aziz did not follow
he added, “In her letters, in her letters. She loved you.”

“Yes, your mother was my best friend in all the world.” He was
silent, puzzled by his own great gratitude. What did this eternal
goodness of Mrs. Moore amount to? To nothing, if brought to the
test of thought. She had not borne witness in his favour, nor
visited him in the prison, yet she had stolen to the depths of his
heart, and he always adored her. “This is our monsoon, the best
weather,” he said, while the lights of the procession waved as
though embroidered on an agitated curtain. “How I wish she could
have seen them, our rains. Now is the time when all things are
happy, young and old. They are happy out there with their savage
noise, though we cannot follow them; the tanks are all full so they
dance, and this is India. I wish you were not with officials, then
I would show you my country, but I cannot. Perhaps I will just take
you out on the water now, for one short half-hour.”

Was the cycle beginning again? His heart was too full to draw back.
He must slip out in the darkness, and do this one act of homage to
Mrs. Moore’s son. He knew where the oars were—hidden to deter the
visitors from going out—and he brought the second pair, in case
they met the other boat; the Fieldings had pushed themselves out
with long poles, and might get into difficulties, for the wind was
rising.

Once on the water, he became easy. One kind action was with him
always a channel for another, and soon the torrent of his
hospitality gushed forth and he began doing the honours of Mau and
persuading himself that he understood the wild procession, which
increased in lights and sounds as the complications of its ritual
developed. There was little need to row, for the freshening gale
blew them in the direction they desired. Thorns scratched the keel,
they ran into an islet and startled some cranes. The strange
temporary life of the August flood-water bore them up and seemed
as though it would last for ever.

The boat was a rudderless dinghy. Huddled up in the stern, with
the spare pair of oars in his arms, the guest asked no questions
about details. There was presently a flash of lightning, followed
by a second flash—little red scratches on the ponderous sky. “Was
that the Rajah?” he asked.

“What—what do you mean?”

“Row back.”

“But there’s no Rajah—nothing——”

“Row back, you will see what I mean.”

Aziz found it hard work against the advancing wind. But he fixed
his eyes on the pin of light that marked the Guest House and backed
a few strokes.

“There . . .”

Floating in the darkness was a king, who sat under a canopy, in
shining royal robes. . . .

“I can’t tell you what that is, I’m sure,” he whispered. “His
Highness is dead. I think we should go back at once.”

They were close to the promontory of the tombs, and had looked
straight into the chhatri of the Rajah’s father through an opening
in the trees. That was the explanation. He had heard of the
image—made to imitate life at enormous expense—but he had never
chanced to see it before, though he frequently rowed on the lake.
There was only one spot from which it could be seen, and Ralph had
directed him to it. Hastily he pulled away, feeling that his
companion was not so much a visitor as a guide. He remarked, “Shall
we go back now?”

“There is still the procession.”

“I’d rather not go nearer—they have such strange customs, and might
hurt you.”

“A little nearer.”

Aziz obeyed. He knew with his heart that this was Mrs. Moore’s son,
and indeed until his heart was involved he knew nothing.
“Radhakrishna Radhakrishna Radhakrishna Radhakrishna Krishnaradha,”
went the chant, then suddenly changed, and in the interstice he
heard, almost certainly, the syllables of salvation that had
sounded during his trial at Chandrapore.

“Mr. Moore, don’t tell anyone that the Rajah is dead. It is a
secret still, I am supposed not to say. We pretend he is alive
until after the festival, to prevent unhappiness. Do you want to
go still nearer?”

“Yes.”

He tried to keep the boat out of the glare of the torches that
began to star the other shore. Rockets kept going off, also the
guns. Suddenly, closer than he had calculated, the palanquin of
Krishna appeared from behind a ruined wall, and descended the
carven glistening water-steps. On either side of it the singers
tumbled, a woman prominent, a wild and beautiful young saint with
flowers in her hair. She was praising God without attributes—thus
did she apprehend Him. Others praised Him without attributes,
seeing Him in this or that organ of the body or manifestation of
the sky. Down they rushed to the foreshore and stood in the small
waves, and a sacred meal was prepared, of which those who felt
worthy partook. Old Godbole detected the boat, which was drifting
in on the gale, and he waved his arms—whether in wrath or joy Aziz
never discovered. Above stood the secular power of Mau—elephants,
artillery, crowds—and high above them a wild tempest started,
confined at first to the upper regions of the air. Gusts of wind
mixed darkness and light, sheets of rain cut from the north,
stopped, cut from the south, began rising from below, and across
them struggled the singers, sounding every note but terror, and
preparing to throw God away, God Himself, (not that God can be
thrown) into the storm. Thus was He thrown year after year, and
were others thrown—little images of Ganpati, baskets of ten-day
corn, tiny tazias after Mohurram—scapegoats, husks, emblems of
passage; a passage not easy, not now, not here, not to be
apprehended except when it is unattainable; the God to be thrown
was an emblem of that.

The village of Gokul reappeared upon its tray. It was the substitute
for the silver image, which never left its haze of flowers; on
behalf of another symbol, it was to perish. A servitor took it in
his hands, and tore off the blue and white streamers. He was naked,
broad-shouldered, thin-waisted—the Indian body again triumphant—and
it was his hereditary office to close the gates of salvation. He
entered the dark waters, pushing the village before him, until the
clay dolls slipped off their chairs and began to gutter in the
rain, and King Kansa was confounded with the father and mother of
the Lord. Dark and solid, the little waves sipped, then a great
wave washed and then English voices cried “Take care!”

The boats had collided with each other.

The four outsiders flung out their arms and grappled, and, with
oars and poles sticking out, revolved like a mythical monster in
the whirlwind. The worshippers howled with wrath or joy, as they
drifted forward helplessly against the servitor. Who awaited them,
his beautiful dark face expressionless, and as the last morsels
melted on his tray, it struck them.

The shock was minute, but Stella, nearest to it, shrank into her
husband’s arms, then reached forward, then flung herself against
Aziz, and her motions capsized them. They plunged into the warm,
shallow water, and rose struggling into a tornado of noise. The
oars, the sacred tray, the letters of Ronny and Adela, broke loose
and floated confusedly. Artillery was fired, drums beaten, the
elephants trumpeted, and drowning all an immense peal of thunder,
unaccompanied by lightning, cracked like a mallet on the dome.

That was the climax, as far as India admits of one. The rain
settled in steadily to its job of wetting everybody and everything
through, and soon spoiled the cloth of gold on the palanquin and
the costly disc-shaped banners. Some of the torches went out,
fireworks didn’t catch, there began to be less singing, and the
tray returned to Professor Godbole, who picked up a fragment of
the mud adhering and smeared it on his forehead without much
ceremony. Whatever had happened had happened, and while the
intruders picked themselves up, the crowds of Hindus began a
desultory move back into the town. The image went back too, and on
the following day underwent a private death of its own, when some
curtains of magenta and green were lowered in front of the dynastic
shrine. The singing went on even longer . . . ragged edges of
religion . . . unsatisfactory and undramatic tangles. . . . “God
is love.” Looking back at the great blur of the last twenty-four
hours, no man could say where was the emotional centre of it, any
more than he could locate the heart of a cloud.




  CHAPTER XXXVII


Friends again, yet aware that they could meet no more, Aziz and
Fielding went for their last ride in the Mau jungles. The floods
had abated and the Rajah was officially dead, so the Guest House
party were departing next morning, as decorum required. What with
the mourning and the festival, the visit was a failure.

Fielding had scarcely seen Godbole, who promised every day to show
him over the King-Emperor George Fifth High School, his main
objective, but always made some excuse. This afternoon Aziz let
out what had happened: the King-Emperor had been converted into a
granary, and the Minister of Education did not like to admit this
to his former Principal. The school had been opened only last year
by the Agent to the Governor-General, and it still flourished on
paper; he hoped to start it again before its absence was remarked
and to collect its scholars before they produced children of their
own. Fielding laughed at the tangle and waste of energy, but he
did not travel as lightly as in the past; education was a continuous
concern to him, because his income and the comfort of his family
depended on it. He knew that few Indians think education good in
itself, and he deplored this now on the widest grounds. He began
to say something heavy on the subject of Native States, but the
friendliness of Aziz distracted him. This reconciliation was a
success, anyhow. After the funny shipwreck there had been no more
nonsense or bitterness, and they went back laughingly to their old
relationship as if nothing had happened. Now they rode between
jolly bushes and rocks. Presently the ground opened into full
sunlight and they saw a grassy slope bright with butterflies, also
a cobra, which crawled across doing nothing in particular, and
disappeared among some custard apple trees. There were round white
clouds in the sky, and white pools on the earth; the hills in the
distance were purple. The scene was as park-like as England, but
did not cease being queer. They drew rein, to give the cobra
elbow-room, and Aziz produced a letter that he wanted to send to
Miss Quested. A charming letter. He wanted to thank his old enemy
for her fine behaviour two years back: perfectly plain was it now
that she had behaved well. “As I fell into our largest Mau tank
under circumstances our other friends will relate, I thought how
brave Miss Quested was, and decided to tell her so, despite my
imperfect English. Through you I am happy here with my children
instead of in a prison, of that I make no doubt. My children shall
be taught to speak of you with the greatest affection and respect.”

“Miss Quested will be greatly pleased. I am glad you have seen her
courage at last.”

“I want to do kind actions all round and wipe out the wretched
business of the Marabar for ever. I have been so disgracefully
hasty, thinking you meant to get hold of my money: as bad a mistake
as the cave itself.”

“Aziz, I wish you would talk to my wife. She too believes that the
Marabar is wiped out.”

“How so?”

“I don’t know, perhaps she might tell you, she won’t tell me. She
has ideas I don’t share—indeed, when I’m away from her I think them
ridiculous. When I’m with her, I suppose because I’m fond of her,
I feel different, I feel half dead and half blind. My wife’s after
something. You and I and Miss Quested are, roughly speaking, not
after anything. We jog on as decently as we can, you a little in
front—a laudable little party. But my wife is not with us.”

“What are you meaning? Is Stella not faithful to you, Cyril? This
fills me with great concern.”

Fielding hesitated. He was not quite happy about his marriage. He
was passionate physically again—the final flare-up before the
clinkers of middle age—and he knew that his wife did not love him
as much as he loved her, and he was ashamed of pestering her. But
during the visit to Mau the situation had improved. There seemed
a link between them at last—that link outside either participant
that is necessary to every relationship. In the language of
theology, their union had been blessed. He could assure Aziz that
Stella was not only faithful to him, but likely to become more so;
and trying to express what was not clear to himself, he added dully
that different people had different points of view. “If you won’t
talk about the Marabar to Stella, why won’t you talk to Ralph? He
is a wise boy really. And (same metaphor) he rides a little behind
her, though with her.”

“Tell him also, I have nothing to say to him, but he is indeed a
wise boy and has always one Indian friend. I partly love him
because he brought me back to you to say good-bye. For this is
good-bye, Cyril, though to think about it will spoil our ride and
make us sad.”

“No, we won’t think about it.” He too felt that this was their last
free intercourse. All the stupid misunderstandings had been cleared
up, but socially they had no meeting-place. He had thrown in his
lot with Anglo-India by marrying a countrywoman, and he was
acquiring some of its limitations, and already felt surprise at
his own past heroism. Would he to-day defy all his own people for
the sake of a stray Indian? Aziz was a memento, a trophy, they were
proud of each other, yet they must inevitably part. And, anxious
to make what he could of this last afternoon, he forced himself to
speak intimately about his wife, the person most dear to him. He
said: “From her point of view, Mau has been a success. It calmed
her—both of them suffer from restlessness. She found something
soothing, some solution of her queer troubles here.” After a
silence—myriads of kisses around them as the earth drew the water
in—he continued: “Do you know anything about this Krishna business?”

“My dear chap, officially they call it Gokul Ashtami. All the State
offices are closed, but how else should it concern you and me?”

“Gokul is the village where Krishna was born—well, more or less
born, for there’s the same hovering between it and another village
as between Bethlehem and Nazareth. What I want to discover is its
spiritual side, if it has one.”

“It is useless discussing Hindus with me. Living with them teaches
me no more. When I think I annoy them, I do not. When I think I
don’t annoy them, I do. Perhaps they will sack me for tumbling on
to their dolls’-house; on the other hand, perhaps they will double
my salary. Time will prove. Why so curious about them?”

“It’s difficult to explain. I never really understood or liked
them, except an occasional scrap of Godbole. Does the old fellow
still say ‘Come, come?’”

“Oh, presumably.”

Fielding sighed, opened his lips, shut them, then said with a
little laugh, “I can’t explain, because it isn’t in words at all,
but why do my wife and her brother like Hinduism, though they take
no interest in its forms? They won’t talk to me about this. They
know I think a certain side of their lives is a mistake, and are
shy. That’s why I wish you would talk to them, for at all events
you’re Oriental.”

Aziz refused to reply. He didn’t want to meet Stella and Ralph
again, knew they didn’t want to meet him, was incurious about their
secrets, and felt good old Cyril to be a bit clumsy. Something—not
a sight, but a sound—flitted past him, and caused him to re-read
his letter to Miss Quested. Hadn’t he wanted to say something else
to her? Taking out his pen, he added: “For my own part, I shall
henceforth connect you with the name that is very sacred in my
mind, namely, Mrs. Moore.” When he had finished, the mirror of the
scenery was shattered, the meadow disintegrated into butterflies.
A poem about Mecca—the Caaba of Union—the thorn-bushes where
pilgrims die before they have seen the Friend—they flitted next;
he thought of his wife; and then the whole semi-mystic, semi-sensuous
overturn, so characteristic of his spiritual life, came to end like
a landslip and rested in its due place, and he found himself riding
in the jungle with his dear Cyril.

“Oh, shut up,” he said. “Don’t spoil our last hour with foolish
questions. Leave Krishna alone, and talk about something sensible.”

They did. All the way back to Mau they wrangled about politics.
Each had hardened since Chandrapore, and a good knock about proved
enjoyable. They trusted each other, although they were going to
part, perhaps because they were going to part. Fielding had “no
further use for politeness,” he said, meaning that the British
Empire really can’t be abolished because it’s rude. Aziz retorted,
“Very well, and we have no use for you,” and glared at him with
abstract hate. Fielding said: “Away from us, Indians go to seed at
once. Look at the King-Emperor High School! Look at you, forgetting
your medicine and going back to charms. Look at your poems.”—“Jolly
good poems, I’m getting published Bombay side.”—“Yes, and what do
they say? Free our women and India will be free. Try it, my lad.
Free your own lady in the first place, and see who’ll wash Ahmed
Karim and Jamila’s faces. A nice situation!”

Aziz grew more excited. He rose in his stirrups and pulled at his
horse’s head in the hope it would rear. Then he should feel in a
battle. He cried: “Clear out, all you Turtons and Burtons. We
wanted to know you ten years back—now it’s too late. If we see you
and sit on your committees, it’s for political reasons, don’t you
make any mistake.” His horse did rear. “Clear out, clear out, I
say. Why are we put to so much suffering? We used to blame you,
now we blame ourselves, we grow wiser. Until England is in
difficulties we keep silent, but in the next European war—aha, aha!
Then is our time.” He paused, and the scenery, though it smiled,
fell like a gravestone on any human hope. They cantered past a
temple to Hanuman—God so loved the world that he took monkey’s
flesh upon him—and past a Saivite temple, which invited to lust,
but under the semblance of eternity, its obscenities bearing no
relation to those of our flesh and blood. They splashed through
butterflies and frogs; great trees with leaves like plates rose
among the brushwood. The divisions of daily life were returning,
the shrine had almost shut.

“Who do you want instead of the English? The Japanese?” jeered
Fielding, drawing rein.

“No, the Afghans. My own ancestors.”

“Oh, your Hindu friends will like that, won’t they?”

“It will be arranged—a conference of Oriental statesmen.”

“It will indeed be arranged.”

“Old story of ‘We will rob every man and rape every woman from
Peshawar to Calcutta,’ I suppose, which you get some nobody to
repeat and then quote every week in the _Pioneer_ in order to
frighten us into retaining you! We know!” Still he couldn’t quite
fit in Afghans at Mau, and, finding he was in a corner, made his
horse rear again until he remembered that he had, or ought to have,
a mother-land. Then he shouted: “India shall be a nation! No
foreigners of any sort! Hindu and Moslem and Sikh and all shall be
one! Hurrah! Hurrah for India! Hurrah! Hurrah!”

India a nation! What an apotheosis! Last comer to the drab
nineteenth-century sisterhood! Waddling in at this hour of the
world to take her seat! She, whose only peer was the Holy Roman
Empire, she shall rank with Guatemala and Belgium perhaps! Fielding
mocked again. And Aziz in an awful rage danced this way and that,
not knowing what to do, and cried: “Down with the English anyhow.
That’s certain. Clear out, you fellows, double quick, I say. We
may hate one another, but we hate you most. If I don’t make you
go, Ahmed will, Karim will, if it’s fifty five-hundred years we
shall get rid of you, yes, we shall drive every blasted Englishman
into the sea, and then”—he rode against him furiously—“and then,”
he concluded, half kissing him, “you and I shall be friends.”

“Why can’t we be friends now?” said the other, holding him
affectionately. “It’s what I want. It’s what you want.”

But the horses didn’t want it—they swerved apart; the earth didn’t
want it, sending up rocks through which riders must pass single
file; the temples, the tank, the jail, the palace, the birds, the
carrion, the Guest House, that came into view as they issued from
the gap and saw Mau beneath: they didn’t want it, they said in
their hundred voices, “No, not yet,” and the sky said, “No, not
there.”

  Weybridge, 1924.




  [END]




  _Mr. E. M. FORSTERS NOVELS_


  WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD

“A remarkable book. Not often has the reviewer to welcome a new
writer and a new novel so directly conveying the impression of
power and an easy mastery of material. Here there are qualities of
style and thought which awaken a sense of satisfaction and delight;
a taste in the selection of words; a keen insight into the humour
(and not merely the humours) of life; and a challenge to its
accepted courses. It is told with a deftness, a lightness, a grace
of touch, and a radiant atmosphere of humour which mark a strength
and capacity giving large promise for the future.”—_Daily News._

“Mr. Forster has succeeded, with a cleverness that is almost
uncanny, in illustrating the tragic possibilities that reside in
insignificant and unimportant characters when they seek to
emancipate themselves from the bondage of convention, or to control
those who are dominated by a wholly different set of
traditions.”—_Spectator._


  THE LONGEST JOURNEY

“This novel is a very remarkable and distinguished piece of work.
This new book is one of the most promising we have read from a
young writer, not only for many publishing seasons, but even for
many years. Its abundant cleverness fills even the more strenuous
passages with vivacity. The strength of the book consists in its
implicit indictment of the mean conventional, self-deceitful
insincerity of so much of modern English educated middle-class
life. This is certainly one of the cleverest and most original
books that have appeared from a new writer since George Meredith
first took the literary critics into his confidence.”—_Daily
Telegraph._

“It is interesting and living and amusing.”—_The Times._


  A ROOM WITH A VIEW

“Mr. Forster’s new novel is not only much the best of the three he
has written, but it clearly admits him to the limited class of
writers who stand above and apart from the manufacturers of
contemporary fiction.”—_Spectator._

“It is packed with wonderful impressions and radiant
sayings.”—_Evening Standard._

“This is one of the cleverest and most entertaining novels we have
read for some time. The characters are as clear and salient as a
portrait by Sargent, and there are many of them. One is continually
moved to appreciative smiles by clever little touches of description
and enlightenment. The story, too, is interesting and real.”—_Daily
Mail._

“This odd title suggests a story rather out of the common, and it
does not prove in the least misleading. The book is both original
and delightful, presenting scenes of everyday life almost
commonplace sometimes in their fidelity to nature, but chronicled
in such a happy vein of quiet humour and with such penetrating
observation as makes each little incident and dialogue a source of
sheer joy to the reader. The characters are admirably drawn.”—_Pall
Mall Gazette._

“We have originality and observation, and a book as clever as the
other books that Mr. Forster has written already.”—_Times._

“Mr. Forster has earned the right to serious criticism. His work
has revealed individuality, distinction, and a power of suggestion
which opens large issues. ‘A Room with a View’ might stand for a
title of all his work. There is a spirit of high comedy in it. Mr.
Forster can describe with sure touch the queer satisfactions and
still queerer repugnances which make up the strange region of
modern things. Had this element been there alone, the book would
have been merely an excellent satirical judgment of manners and
conventions. Had the other elements stood alone—the revelation of
the hidden life—it would have been mystical, intangible, illusory.
By the fusion of the one with the other, he is able to present work
humorous and arresting, with a curious element in it of compelling
strength and emotion.”—_Nation._


  HOWARDS END

“‘Howards End’ is packed full of good things. It stands out head
and shoulders above the great mass of fiction now claiming a
hearing. The autumn season has brought us some good novels, but
this is, so far, the best of them. ‘Howards End’ raises its author
to a place among contemporary novelists which few even of those
whose earlier work shows promise succeed in attaining.”—_Daily
Mail._

“There is no doubt about it whatever. Mr. E. M. Forster is one of
the great novelists. His stories are not about life. They are life.
His plots are absorbing because his characters are real. All will
agree as to the value of the book, as to its absorbing interest,
the art and power with which it is put together, and they will feel
with us that it is a book quite out of the common by a writer who
is one of our assets, and is likely to be one of our glories.”—_Daily
Telegraph._

“Mr. E. M. Forster has now done what critical admirers of his
foregoing novels have confidently looked for—he has written a book
in which his highly original talent has found full and ripe
expression. A very remarkable and original book.”—_The Times._

“The clash of modern culture and modern materialism has seldom
found a more vivid interpreter.”—_Spectator._

“There is life, imagination, and the very flame of action giving
quality to this novel over and above the technique with which it
is built up and the wisdom with which it is informed.”—_Daily
News._

“With this book Mr. Forster seems to us to have arrived, and if he
never writes another line, his niche should be secure.”—_Standard._

“‘Howards End’ is a novel of high talent—the highest.”—_Daily
Graphic._

“This novel, taken with its three predecessors, assures its author
a place amongst the handful of living writers who count.”_—Athenæum._



  LONDON : EDWARD ARNOLD & CO.
One may as well begin with Helen’s letters to her sister.


“Howards End,

“Tuesday.

“Dearest Meg,

“It isn’t going to be what we expected. It is old and little, and
altogether delightful--red brick. We can scarcely pack in as it is,
and the dear knows what will happen when Paul (younger son) arrives
to-morrow. From hall you go right or left into dining-room or
drawing-room. Hall itself is practically a room. You open another door
in it, and there are the stairs going up in a sort of tunnel to the
first-floor. Three bed-rooms in a row there, and three attics in a
row above. That isn’t all the house really, but it’s all that one
notices--nine windows as you look up from the front garden.

“Then there’s a very big wych-elm--to the left as you look up--leaning
a little over the house, and standing on the boundary between the garden
and meadow. I quite love that tree already. Also ordinary elms, oaks--no
nastier than ordinary oaks--pear-trees, apple-trees, and a vine. No
silver birches, though. However, I must get on to my host and hostess. I
only wanted to show that it isn’t the least what we expected. Why did
we settle that their house would be all gables and wiggles, and their
garden all gamboge-coloured paths? I believe simply because we associate
them with expensive hotels--Mrs. Wilcox trailing in beautiful dresses
down long corridors, Mr. Wilcox bullying porters, etc. We females are
that unjust.

“I shall be back Saturday; will let you know train later. They are as
angry as I am that you did not come too; really Tibby is too tiresome,
he starts a new mortal disease every month. How could he have got hay
fever in London? and even if he could, it seems hard that you should
give up a visit to hear a schoolboy sneeze. Tell him that Charles Wilcox
(the son who is here) has hay fever too, but he’s brave, and gets quite
cross when we inquire after it. Men like the Wilcoxes would do Tibby a
power of good. But you won’t agree, and I’d better change the subject.

“This long letter is because I’m writing before breakfast. Oh, the
beautiful vine leaves! The house is covered with a vine. I looked out
earlier, and Mrs. Wilcox was already in the garden. She evidently loves
it. No wonder she sometimes looks tired. She was watching the large
red poppies come out. Then she walked off the lawn to the meadow, whose
corner to the right I can just see. Trail, trail, went her long dress
over the sopping grass, and she came back with her hands full of the hay
that was cut yesterday--I suppose for rabbits or something, as she kept
on smelling it. The air here is delicious. Later on I heard the noise
of croquet balls, and looked out again, and it was Charles Wilcox
practising; they are keen on all games. Presently he started sneezing
and had to stop. Then I hear more clicketing, and it is Mr. Wilcox
practising, and then, ‘a-tissue, a-tissue’: he has to stop too. Then
Evie comes out, and does some calisthenic exercises on a machine that is
tacked on to a green-gage-tree--they put everything to use--and then
she says ‘a-tissue,’ and in she goes. And finally Mrs. Wilcox reappears,
trail, trail, still smelling hay and looking at the flowers. I inflict
all this on you because once you said that life is sometimes life and
sometimes only a drama, and one must learn to distinguish tother from
which, and up to now I have always put that down as ‘Meg’s clever
nonsense.’ But this morning, it really does seem not life but a play,
and it did amuse me enormously to watch the W’s. Now Mrs. Wilcox has
come in.

“I am going to wear [omission]. Last night Mrs. Wilcox wore an
[omission], and Evie [omission]. So it isn’t exactly a go-as-you-please
place, and if you shut your eyes it still seems the wiggly hotel that we
expected. Not if you open them. The dog-roses are too sweet. There is a
great hedge of them over the lawn--magnificently tall, so that they fall
down in garlands, and nice and thin at the bottom, so that you can see
ducks through it and a cow. These belong to the farm, which is the only
house near us. There goes the breakfast gong. Much love. Modified love
to Tibby. Love to Aunt Juley; how good of her to come and keep you
company, but what a bore. Burn this. Will write again Thursday.

“HELEN.”



“Howards End

“Friday

“Dearest Meg,

“I am having a glorious time. I like them all. Mrs. Wilcox, if quieter
than in Germany, is sweeter than ever, and I never saw anything like her
steady unselfishness, and the best of it is that the others do not take
advantage of her. They are the very happiest, jolliest family that you
can imagine. I do really feel that we are making friends. The fun of
it is that they think me a noodle, and say so--at least, Mr. Wilcox
does--and when that happens, and one doesn’t mind, it’s a pretty sure
test, isn’t it? He says the most horrid things about woman’s suffrage so
nicely, and when I said I believed in equality he just folded his arms
and gave me such a setting down as I’ve never had. Meg, shall we ever
learn to talk less? I never felt so ashamed of myself in my life. I
couldn’t point to a time when men had been equal, nor even to a time
when the wish to be equal had made them happier in other ways. I
couldn’t say a word. I had just picked up the notion that equality is
good from some book--probably from poetry, or you. Anyhow, it’s been
knocked into pieces, and, like all people who are really strong, Mr.
Wilcox did it without hurting me. On the other hand, I laugh at them for
catching hay fever. We live like fighting-cocks, and Charles takes us
out every day in the motor--a tomb with trees in it, a hermit’s house,
a wonderful road that was made by the Kings of Mercia--tennis--a cricket
match--bridge and at night we squeeze up in this lovely house. The whole
clan’s here now--it’s like a rabbit warren. Evie is a dear. They want
me to stop over Sunday--I suppose it won’t matter if I do. Marvellous
weather and the views marvellous--views westward to the high ground.
Thank you for your letter. Burn this.

“Your affectionate

“HELEN.”



“Howards End,

“Sunday.

“Dearest, dearest Meg,--I do not know what you will say: Paul and I are
in love--the younger son who only came here Wednesday.”



CHAPTER II

Margaret glanced at her sister’s note and pushed it over the
breakfast-table to her aunt. There was a moment’s hush, and then the
flood-gates opened.

“I can tell you nothing, Aunt Juley. I know no more than you do. We
met--we only met the father and mother abroad last spring. I know so
little that I didn’t even know their son’s name. It’s all so--” She
waved her hand and laughed a little.

“In that case it is far too sudden.”

“Who knows, Aunt Juley, who knows?”

“But, Margaret, dear, I mean, we mustn’t be unpractical now that we’ve
come to facts. It is too sudden, surely.”

“Who knows!”

“But, Margaret, dear--”

“I’ll go for her other letters,” said Margaret. “No, I won’t, I’ll
finish my breakfast. In fact, I haven’t them. We met the Wilcoxes on an
awful expedition that we made from Heidelberg to Speyer. Helen and I
had got it into our heads that there was a grand old cathedral at
Speyer--the Archbishop of Speyer was one of the seven electors--you
know--‘Speyer, Maintz, and Koln.’ Those three sees once commanded the
Rhine Valley and got it the name of Priest Street.”

“I still feel quite uneasy about this business, Margaret.”

“The train crossed by a bridge of boats, and at first sight it looked
quite fine. But oh, in five minutes we had seen the whole thing. The
cathedral had been ruined, absolutely ruined, by restoration; not an
inch left of the original structure. We wasted a whole day, and came
across the Wilcoxes as we were eating our sandwiches in the public
gardens. They too, poor things, had been taken in--they were actually
stopping at Speyer--and they rather liked Helen’s insisting that they
must fly with us to Heidelberg. As a matter of fact, they did come on
next day. We all took some drives together. They knew us well enough to
ask Helen to come and see them--at least, I was asked too, but Tibby’s
illness prevented me, so last Monday she went alone. That’s all. You
know as much as I do now. It’s a young man out of the unknown. She was
to have come back Saturday, but put off till Monday, perhaps on account
of--I don’t know.”

She broke off, and listened to the sounds of a London morning. Their
house was in Wickham Place, and fairly quiet, for a lofty promontory of
buildings separated it from the main thoroughfare. One had the sense of
a backwater, or rather of an estuary, whose waters flowed in from the
invisible sea, and ebbed into a profound silence while the waves without
were still beating. Though the promontory consisted of flats--expensive,
with cavernous entrance halls, full of concierges and palms--it
fulfilled its purpose, and gained for the older houses opposite a
certain measure of peace.

These, too, would be swept away in time, and another promontory would
arise upon their site, as humanity piled itself higher and higher on the
precious soil of London.

Mrs. Munt had her own method of interpreting her nieces. She decided
that Margaret was a little hysterical, and was trying to gain time by
a torrent of talk. Feeling very diplomatic, she lamented the fate of
Speyer, and declared that never, never should she be so misguided as to
visit it, and added of her own accord that the principles of restoration
were ill understood in Germany. “The Germans,” she said, “are too
thorough, and this is all very well sometimes, but at other times it
does not do.”

“Exactly,” said Margaret; “Germans are too thorough.” And her eyes began
to shine.

“Of course I regard you Schlegels as English,” said Mrs. Munt
hastily--“English to the backbone.”

Margaret leaned forward and stroked her hand.

“And that reminds me--Helen’s letter.”

“Oh yes, Aunt Juley, I am thinking all right about Helen’s letter. I
know--I must go down and see her. I am thinking about her all right. I
am meaning to go down.”

“But go with some plan,” said Mrs. Munt, admitting into her kindly voice
a note of exasperation. “Margaret, if I may interfere, don’t be taken by
surprise. What do you think of the Wilcoxes? Are they our sort? Are they
likely people? Could they appreciate Helen, who is to my mind a very
special sort of person? Do they care about Literature and Art? That is
most important when you come to think of it. Literature and Art. Most
important. How old would the son be? She says ‘younger son.’ Would he
be in a position to marry? Is he likely to make Helen happy? Did you
gather--”

“I gathered nothing.”

They began to talk at once.

“Then in that case--”

“In that case I can make no plans, don’t you see.”

“On the contrary--”

“I hate plans. I hate lines of action. Helen isn’t a baby.”

“Then in that case, my dear, why go down?”

Margaret was silent. If her aunt could not see why she must go down,
she was not going to tell her. She was not going to say, “I love my dear
sister; I must be near her at this crisis of her life.” The affections
are more reticent than the passions, and their expression more subtle.
If she herself should ever fall in love with a man, she, like Helen,
would proclaim it from the housetops, but as she loved only a sister she
used the voiceless language of sympathy.

“I consider you odd girls,” continued Mrs. Munt, “and very wonderful
girls, and in many ways far older than your years. But--you won’t be
offended? frankly, I feel you are not up to this business. It requires
an older person. Dear, I have nothing to call me back to Swanage.” She
spread out her plump arms. “I am all at your disposal. Let me go down to
this house whose name I forget instead of you.”

“Aunt Juley”--she jumped up and kissed her--“I must, must go to Howards
End myself. You don’t exactly understand, though I can never thank you
properly for offering.”

“I do understand,” retorted Mrs. Munt, with immense confidence. “I go
down in no spirit of interference, but to make inquiries. Inquiries are
necessary. Now, I am going to be rude. You would say the wrong thing; to
a certainty you would. In your anxiety for Helen’s happiness you would
offend the whole of these Wilcoxes by asking one of your impetuous
questions--not that one minds offending them.”

“I shall ask no questions. I have it in Helen’s writing that she and
a man are in love. There is no question to ask as long as she keeps to
that. All the rest isn’t worth a straw. A long engagement if you like,
but inquiries, questions, plans, lines of action--no, Aunt Juley, no.”

Away she hurried, not beautiful, not supremely brilliant, but filled
with something that took the place of both qualities--something best
described as a profound vivacity, a continual and sincere response to
all that she encountered in her path through life.

“If Helen had written the same to me about a shop assistant or a
penniless clerk--”

“Dear Margaret, do come into the library and shut the door. Your good
maids are dusting the banisters.”

“--or if she had wanted to marry the man who calls for Carter Paterson,
I should have said the same.” Then, with one of those turns that
convinced her aunt that she was not mad really, and convinced observers
of another type that she was not a barren theorist, she added: “Though
in the case of Carter Paterson I should want it to be a very long
engagement indeed, I must say.”

“I should think so,” said Mrs. Munt; “and, indeed, I can scarcely
follow you. Now, just imagine if you said anything of that sort to the
Wilcoxes. I understand it, but most good people would think you mad.
Imagine how disconcerting for Helen! What is wanted is a person who will
go slowly, slowly in this business, and see how things are and where
they are likely to lead to.”

Margaret was down on this.

“But you implied just now that the engagement must be broken off.”

“I think probably it must; but slowly.”

“Can you break an engagement off slowly?” Her eyes lit up. “What’s an
engagement made of, do you suppose? I think it’s made of some hard stuff
that may snap, but can’t break. It is different to the other ties of
life. They stretch or bend. They admit of degree. They’re different.”

“Exactly so. But won’t you let me just run down to Howards House, and
save you all the discomfort? I will really not interfere, but I do so
thoroughly understand the kind of thing you Schlegels want that one
quiet look round will be enough for me.”

Margaret again thanked her, again kissed her, and then ran upstairs to
see her brother.

He was not so well.

The hay fever had worried him a good deal all night. His head ached,
his eyes were wet, his mucous membrane, he informed her, in a most
unsatisfactory condition. The only thing that made life worth living was
the thought of Walter Savage Landor, from whose Imaginary Conversations
she had promised to read at frequent intervals during the day.

It was rather difficult. Something must be done about Helen. She must
be assured that it is not a criminal offence to love at first sight.
A telegram to this effect would be cold and cryptic, a personal visit
seemed each moment more impossible. Now the doctor arrived, and said
that Tibby was quite bad. Might it really be best to accept Aunt Juley’s
kind offer, and to send her down to Howards End with a note?

Certainly Margaret was impulsive. She did swing rapidly from one
decision to another. Running downstairs into the library, she cried:
“Yes, I have changed my mind; I do wish that you would go.”

There was a train from King’s Cross at eleven. At half-past ten Tibby,
with rare self-effacement, fell asleep, and Margaret was able to drive
her aunt to the station.

“You will remember, Aunt Juley, not to be drawn into discussing the
engagement. Give my letter to Helen, and say whatever you feel yourself,
but do keep clear of the relatives. We have scarcely got their names
straight yet, and, besides, that sort of thing is so uncivilised and
wrong.”

“So uncivilised?” queried Mrs. Munt, fearing that she was losing the
point of some brilliant remark.

“Oh, I used an affected word. I only meant would you please talk the
thing over only with Helen.”

“Only with Helen.”

“Because--” But it was no moment to expound the personal nature of love.
Even Margaret shrank from it, and contented herself with stroking
her good aunt’s hand, and with meditating, half sensibly and half
poetically, on the journey that was about to begin from King’s Cross.

Like many others who have lived long in a great capital, she had strong
feelings about the various railway termini. They are our gates to the
glorious and the unknown. Through them we pass out into adventure and
sunshine, to them, alas! we return. In Paddington all Cornwall is latent
and the remoter west; down the inclines of Liverpool Street lie fenlands
and the illimitable Broads; Scotland is through the pylons of Euston;
Wessex behind the poised chaos of Waterloo. Italians realise this, as is
natural; those of them who are so unfortunate as to serve as waiters in
Berlin call the Anhalt Bahnhof the Stazione d’Italia, because by it they
must return to their homes. And he is a chilly Londoner who does not
endow his stations with some personality, and extend to them, however
shyly, the emotions of fear and love.

To Margaret--I hope that it will not set the reader against her--the
station of King’s Cross had always suggested Infinity. Its very
situation--withdrawn a little behind the facile splendours of St.
Pancras--implied a comment on the materialism of life. Those two great
arches, colourless, indifferent, shouldering between them an unlovely
clock, were fit portals for some eternal adventure, whose issue might
be prosperous, but would certainly not be expressed in the ordinary
language of prosperity. If you think this ridiculous, remember that it
is not Margaret who is telling you about it; and let me hasten to add
that they were in plenty of time for the train; that Mrs. Munt, though
she took a second-class ticket, was put by the guard into a first (only
two “seconds” on the train, one smoking and the other babies--one cannot
be expected to travel with babies); and that Margaret, on her return to
Wickham Place, was confronted with the following telegram:

“All over. Wish I had never written. Tell no one--, HELEN.”

But Aunt Juley was gone--gone irrevocably, and no power on earth could
stop her.



CHAPTER III

Most complacently did Mrs. Munt rehearse her mission. Her nieces were
independent young women, and it was not often that she was able to help
them. Emily’s daughters had never been quite like other girls. They
had been left motherless when Tibby was born, when Helen was five and
Margaret herself but thirteen. It was before the passing of the Deceased
Wife’s Sister Bill, so Mrs. Munt could without impropriety offer to
go and keep house at Wickham Place. But her brother-in-law, who was
peculiar and a German, had referred the question to Margaret, who with
the crudity of youth had answered, “No, they could manage much better
alone.” Five years later Mr. Schlegel had died too, and Mrs. Munt had
repeated her offer. Margaret, crude no longer, had been grateful and
extremely nice, but the substance of her answer had been the same. “I
must not interfere a third time,” thought Mrs. Munt. However, of course
she did. She learnt, to her horror, that Margaret, now of age, was
taking her money out of the old safe investments and putting it into
Foreign Things, which always smash. Silence would have been criminal.
Her own fortune was invested in Home Rails, and most ardently did
she beg her niece to imitate her. “Then we should be together, dear.”
 Margaret, out of politeness, invested a few hundreds in the Nottingham
and Derby Railway, and though the Foreign Things did admirably and the
Nottingham and Derby declined with the steady dignity of which only Home
Rails are capable, Mrs. Munt never ceased to rejoice, and to say, “I did
manage that, at all events. When the smash comes poor Margaret will have
a nest-egg to fall back upon.” This year Helen came of age, and exactly
the same thing happened in Helen’s case; she also would shift her money
out of Consols, but she, too, almost without being pressed, consecrated
a fraction of it to the Nottingham and Derby Railway. So far so good,
but in social matters their aunt had accomplished nothing. Sooner or
later the girls would enter on the process known as throwing themselves
away, and if they had delayed hitherto, it was only that they might
throw themselves more vehemently in the future. They saw too many people
at Wickham Place--unshaven musicians, an actress even, German cousins
(one knows what foreigners are), acquaintances picked up at Continental
hotels (one knows what they are too). It was interesting, and down
at Swanage no one appreciated culture more than Mrs. Munt; but it was
dangerous, and disaster was bound to come. How right she was, and how
lucky to be on the spot when the disaster came!

The train sped northward, under innumerable tunnels. It was only an
hour’s journey, but Mrs. Munt had to raise and lower the window again
and again. She passed through the South Welwyn Tunnel, saw light for
a moment, and entered the North Welwyn Tunnel, of tragic fame. She
traversed the immense viaduct, whose arches span untroubled meadows and
the dreamy flow of Tewin Water. She skirted the parks of politicians. At
times the Great North Road accompanied her, more suggestive of infinity
than any railway, awakening, after a nap of a hundred years, to such
life as is conferred by the stench of motor-cars, and to such culture
as is implied by the advertisements of antibilious pills. To history,
to tragedy, to the past, to the future, Mrs. Munt remained equally
indifferent; hers but to concentrate on the end of her journey, and to
rescue poor Helen from this dreadful mess.

The station for Howards End was at Hilton, one of the large villages
that are strung so frequently along the North Road, and that owe their
size to the traffic of coaching and pre-coaching days. Being near
London, it had not shared in the rural decay, and its long High Street
had budded out right and left into residential estates. For about a
mile a series of tiled and slated houses passed before Mrs. Munt’s
inattentive eyes, a series broken at one point by six Danish tumuli that
stood shoulder to shoulder along the highroad, tombs of soldiers. Beyond
these tumuli, habitations thickened, and the train came to a standstill
in a tangle that was almost a town.

The station, like the scenery, like Helen’s letters, struck an
indeterminate note. Into which country will it lead, England or
Suburbia? It was new, it had island platforms and a subway, and the
superficial comfort exacted by business men. But it held hints of local
life, personal intercourse, as even Mrs. Munt was to discover.

“I want a house,” she confided to the ticket boy. “Its name is Howards
Lodge. Do you know where it is?”

“Mr. Wilcox!” the boy called.

A young man in front of them turned around.

“She’s wanting Howards End.”

There was nothing for it but to go forward, though Mrs. Munt was too
much agitated even to stare at the stranger. But remembering that there
were two brothers, she had the sense to say to him, “Excuse me asking,
but are you the younger Mr. Wilcox or the elder?”

“The younger. Can I do anything for you?”

“Oh, well”--she controlled herself with difficulty. “Really. Are you?
I--” She moved; away from the ticket boy and lowered her voice. “I am
Miss Schlegel’s aunt. I ought to introduce myself, oughtn’t I? My name
is Mrs. Munt.”

She was conscious that he raised his cap and said quite coolly, “Oh,
rather; Miss Schlegel is stopping with us. Did you want to see her?”

“Possibly.”

“I’ll call you a cab. No; wait a mo--” He thought. “Our motor’s here.
I’ll run you up in it.”

“That is very kind.”

“Not at all, if you’ll just wait till they bring out a parcel from the
office. This way.”

“My niece is not with you by any chance?”

“No; I came over with my father. He has gone on north in your train.
You’ll see Miss Schlegel at lunch. You’re coming up to lunch, I hope?”

“I should like to come UP,” said Mrs. Munt, not committing herself to
nourishment until she had studied Helen’s lover a little more. He seemed
a gentleman, but had so rattled her round that her powers of observation
were numbed. She glanced at him stealthily.

To a feminine eye there was nothing amiss in the sharp depressions at
the corners of his mouth, or in the rather box-like construction of his
forehead. He was dark, clean-shaven, and seemed accustomed to command.

“In front or behind? Which do you prefer? It may be windy in front.”

“In front if I may; then we can talk.”

“But excuse me one moment--I can’t think what they’re doing with that
parcel.” He strode into the booking-office, and called with a new voice:
“Hi! hi, you there! Are you going to keep me waiting all day? Parcel for
Wilcox, Howards End. Just look sharp!”

Emerging, he said in quieter tones: “This station’s abominably
organised; if I had my way, the whole lot of ’em should get the sack.
May I help you in?”

“This is very good of you,” said Mrs. Munt, as she settled herself into
a luxurious cavern of red leather, and suffered her person to be padded
with rugs and shawls. She was more civil than she had intended, but
really this young man was very kind. Moreover, she was a little afraid
of him; his self-possession was extraordinary. “Very good indeed,” she
repeated, adding: “It is just what I should have wished.”

“Very good of you to say so,” he replied, with a slight look of
surprise, which, like most slight looks, escaped Mrs. Munt’s attention.
“I was just tooling my father over to catch the down train.”

“You see, we heard from Helen this morning.”

Young Wilcox was pouring in petrol, starting his engine, and performing
other actions with which this story has no concern. The great car began
to rock, and the form of Mrs. Munt, trying to explain things, sprang
agreeably up and down among the red cushions. “The mater will be very
glad to see you,” he mumbled. “Hi! I say. Parcel. Parcel for Howards
End. Bring it out. Hi!”

A bearded porter emerged with the parcel in one hand and an entry book
in the other. With the gathering whir of the motor these ejaculations
mingled: “Sign, must I? Why the -- should I sign after all this bother?
Not even got a pencil on you? Remember next time I report you to the
station-master. My time’s of value, though yours mayn’t be. Here”--here
being a tip.

“Extremely sorry, Mrs. Munt.”

“Not at all, Mr. Wilcox.”

“And do you object to going through the village? It is rather a longer
spin, but I have one or two commissions.”

“I should love going through the village. Naturally I am very anxious to
talk things over with you.”

As she said this she felt ashamed, for she was disobeying Margaret’s
instructions. Only disobeying them in the letter, surely. Margaret had
only warned her against discussing the incident with outsiders. Surely
it was not “uncivilised or wrong” to discuss it with the young man
himself, since chance had thrown them together.

A reticent fellow, he made no reply. Mounting by her side, he put on
gloves and spectacles, and off they drove, the bearded porter--life is a
mysterious business--looking after them with admiration.

The wind was in their faces down the station road, blowing the dust into
Mrs. Munt’s eyes. But as soon as they turned into the Great North Road
she opened fire. “You can well imagine,” she said, “that the news was a
great shock to us.”

“What news?”

“Mr. Wilcox,” she said frankly, “Margaret has told me
everything--everything. I have seen Helen’s letter.”

He could not look her in the face, as his eyes were fixed on his work;
he was travelling as quickly as he dared down the High Street. But he
inclined his head in her direction, and said: “I beg your pardon; I
didn’t catch.”

“About Helen. Helen, of course. Helen is a very exceptional person--I
am sure you will let me say this, feeling towards her as you do--indeed,
all the Schlegels are exceptional. I come in no spirit of interference,
but it was a great shock.”

They drew up opposite a draper’s. Without replying, he turned round in
his seat, and contemplated the cloud of dust that they had raised in
their passage through the village. It was settling again, but not all
into the road from which he had taken it. Some of it had percolated
through the open windows, some had whitened the roses and gooseberries
of the wayside gardens, while a certain proportion had entered the
lungs of the villagers. “I wonder when they’ll learn wisdom and tar the
roads,” was his comment. Then a man ran out of the draper’s with a roll
of oilcloth, and off they went again.

“Margaret could not come herself, on account of poor Tibby, so I am here
to represent her and to have a good talk.”

“I’m sorry to be so dense,” said the young man, again drawing up outside
a shop. “But I still haven’t quite understood.”

“Helen, Mr. Wilcox--my niece and you.”

He pushed up his goggles and gazed at her, absolutely bewildered. Horror
smote her to the heart, for even she began to suspect that they were at
cross-purposes, and that she had commenced her mission by some hideous
blunder.

“Miss Schlegel and myself?” he asked, compressing his lips.

“I trust there has been no misunderstanding,” quavered Mrs. Munt. “Her
letter certainly read that way.”

“What way?”

“That you and she--” She paused, then drooped her eyelids.

“I think I catch your meaning,” he said stickily. “What an extraordinary
mistake!”

“Then you didn’t the least--” she stammered, getting blood-red in the
face, and wishing she had never been born.

“Scarcely, as I am already engaged to another lady.” There was a
moment’s silence, and then he caught his breath and exploded with, “Oh,
good God! Don’t tell me it’s some silliness of Paul’s.”

“But you are Paul.”

“I’m not.”

“Then why did you say so at the station?”

“I said nothing of the sort.”

“I beg your pardon, you did.”

“I beg your pardon, I did not. My name is Charles.”

“Younger” may mean son as opposed to father, or second brother as
opposed to first. There is much to be said for either view, and later on
they said it. But they had other questions before them now.

“Do you mean to tell me that Paul--”

But she did not like his voice. He sounded as if he was talking to a
porter, and, certain that he had deceived her at the station, she too
grew angry.

“Do you mean to tell me that Paul and your niece--”

Mrs. Munt--such is human nature--determined that she would champion the
lovers. She was not going to be bullied by a severe young man. “Yes,
they care for one another very much indeed,” she said. “I dare say they
will tell you about it by-and-by. We heard this morning.”

And Charles clenched his fist and cried, “The idiot, the idiot, the
little fool!”

Mrs. Munt tried to divest herself of her rugs. “If that is your
attitude, Mr. Wilcox, I prefer to walk.”

“I beg you will do no such thing. I take you up this moment to the
house. Let me tell you the thing’s impossible, and must be stopped.”

Mrs. Munt did not often lose her temper, and when she did it was only to
protect those whom she loved. On this occasion she blazed out. “I quite
agree, sir. The thing is impossible, and I will come up and stop it. My
niece is a very exceptional person, and I am not inclined to sit still
while she throws herself away on those who will not appreciate her.”

Charles worked his jaws.

“Considering she has only known your brother since Wednesday, and only
met your father and mother at a stray hotel--”

“Could you possibly lower your voice? The shopman will overhear.”

Esprit de classe--if one may coin the phrase--was strong in Mrs. Munt.
She sat quivering while a member of the lower orders deposited a metal
funnel, a saucepan, and a garden squirt beside the roll of oilcloth.

“Right behind?”

“Yes, sir.” And the lower orders vanished in a cloud of dust.

“I warn you: Paul hasn’t a penny; it’s useless.”

“No need to warn us, Mr. Wilcox, I assure you. The warning is all the
other way. My niece has been very foolish, and I shall give her a good
scolding and take her back to London with me.”

“He has to make his way out in Nigeria. He couldn’t think of marrying
for years, and when he does it must be a woman who can stand the
climate, and is in other ways--Why hasn’t he told us? Of course he’s
ashamed. He knows he’s been a fool. And so he has--a downright fool.”

She grew furious.

“Whereas Miss Schlegel has lost no time in publishing the news.”

“If I were a man, Mr. Wilcox, for that last remark I’d box your ears.
You’re not fit to clean my niece’s boots, to sit in the same room with
her, and you dare--you actually dare--I decline to argue with such a
person.”

“All I know is, she’s spread the thing and he hasn’t, and my father’s
away and I--”

“And all that I know is--”

“Might I finish my sentence, please?”

“No.”

Charles clenched his teeth and sent the motor swerving all over the
lane.

She screamed.

So they played the game of Capping Families, a round of which is always
played when love would unite two members of our race. But they played it
with unusual vigour, stating in so many words that Schlegels were better
than Wilcoxes, Wilcoxes better than Schlegels. They flung decency
aside. The man was young, the woman deeply stirred; in both a vein of
coarseness was latent. Their quarrel was no more surprising than are
most quarrels--inevitable at the time, incredible afterwards. But it was
more than usually futile. A few minutes, and they were enlightened. The
motor drew up at Howards End, and Helen, looking very pale, ran out to
meet her aunt.

“Aunt Juley, I have just had a telegram from Margaret; I--I meant to
stop your coming. It isn’t--it’s over.”

The climax was too much for Mrs. Munt. She burst into tears.

“Aunt Juley dear, don’t. Don’t let them know I’ve been so silly. It
wasn’t anything. Do bear up for my sake.”

“Paul,” cried Charles Wilcox, pulling his gloves off.

“Don’t let them know. They are never to know.”

“Oh, my darling Helen--”

“Paul! Paul!”

A very young man came out of the house.

“Paul, is there any truth in this?”

“I didn’t--I don’t--”

“Yes or no, man; plain question, plain answer. Did or didn’t Miss
Schlegel--”

“Charles, dear,” said a voice from the garden. “Charles, dear Charles,
one doesn’t ask plain questions. There aren’t such things.”

They were all silent. It was Mrs. Wilcox.

She approached just as Helen’s letter had described her, trailing
noiselessly over the lawn, and there was actually a wisp of hay in her
hands. She seemed to belong not to the young people and their motor, but
to the house, and to the tree that overshadowed it. One knew that she
worshipped the past, and that the instinctive wisdom the past can alone
bestow had descended upon her--that wisdom to which we give the clumsy
name of aristocracy. High born she might not be. But assuredly she cared
about her ancestors, and let them help her. When she saw Charles angry,
Paul frightened, and Mrs. Munt in tears, she heard her ancestors say,
“Separate those human beings who will hurt each other most. The rest
can wait.” So she did not ask questions. Still less did she pretend that
nothing had happened, as a competent society hostess would have done.
She said: “Miss Schlegel, would you take your aunt up to your room or
to my room, whichever you think best. Paul, do find Evie, and tell her
lunch for six, but I’m not sure whether we shall all be downstairs for
it.” And when they had obeyed her, she turned to her elder son, who
still stood in the throbbing, stinking car, and smiled at him with
tenderness, and without saying a word, turned away from him towards her
flowers.

“Mother,” he called, “are you aware that Paul has been playing the fool
again?”

“It is all right, dear. They have broken off the engagement.”

“Engagement--!”

“They do not love any longer, if you prefer it put that way,” said Mrs.
Wilcox, stooping down to smell a rose.



CHAPTER IV

Helen and her aunt returned to Wickham Place in a state of collapse, and
for a little time Margaret had three invalids on her hands. Mrs. Munt
soon recovered. She possessed to a remarkable degree the power of
distorting the past, and before many days were over she had forgotten
the part played by her own imprudence in the catastrophe. Even at the
crisis she had cried, “Thank goodness, poor Margaret is saved this!”
 which during the journey to London evolved into, “It had to be gone
through by some one,” which in its turn ripened into the permanent form
of “The one time I really did help Emily’s girls was over the Wilcox
business.” But Helen was a more serious patient. New ideas had burst
upon her like a thunderclap, and by them and by their reverberations she
had been stunned.

The truth was that she had fallen in love, not with an individual, but
with a family.

Before Paul arrived she had, as it were, been tuned up into his key.
The energy of the Wilcoxes had fascinated her, had created new images of
beauty in her responsive mind. To be all day with them in the open air,
to sleep at night under their roof, had seemed the supreme joy of
life, and had led to that abandonment of personality that is a possible
prelude to love. She had liked giving in to Mr. Wilcox, or Evie,
or Charles; she had liked being told that her notions of life were
sheltered or academic; that Equality was nonsense, Votes for Women
nonsense, Socialism nonsense, Art and Literature, except when conducive
to strengthening the character, nonsense. One by one the Schlegel
fetiches had been overthrown, and, though professing to defend them, she
had rejoiced. When Mr. Wilcox said that one sound man of business did
more good to the world than a dozen of your social reformers, she had
swallowed the curious assertion without a gasp, and had leant back
luxuriously among the cushions of his motorcar. When Charles said, “Why
be so polite to servants? they don’t understand it,” she had not given
the Schlegel retort of, “If they don’t understand it, I do.” No; she
had vowed to be less polite to servants in the future. “I am swathed in
cant,” she thought, “and it is good for me to be stripped of it.” And
all that she thought or did or breathed was a quiet preparation for
Paul. Paul was inevitable. Charles was taken up with another girl, Mr.
Wilcox was so old, Evie so young, Mrs. Wilcox so different. Round the
absent brother she began to throw the halo of Romance, to irradiate
him with all the splendour of those happy days, to feel that in him she
should draw nearest to the robust ideal. He and she were about the same
age, Evie said. Most people thought Paul handsomer than his brother. He
was certainly a better shot, though not so good at golf. And when Paul
appeared, flushed with the triumph of getting through an examination,
and ready to flirt with any pretty girl, Helen met him halfway, or more
than halfway, and turned towards him on the Sunday evening.

He had been talking of his approaching exile in Nigeria, and he should
have continued to talk of it, and allowed their guest to recover. But
the heave of her bosom flattered him. Passion was possible, and he
became passionate. Deep down in him something whispered, “This girl
would let you kiss her; you might not have such a chance again.”

That was “how it happened,” or, rather, how Helen described it to her
sister, using words even more unsympathetic than my own. But the poetry
of that kiss, the wonder of it, the magic that there was in life for
hours after it--who can describe that? It is so easy for an Englishman
to sneer at these chance collisions of human beings. To the insular
cynic and the insular moralist they offer an equal opportunity. It is so
easy to talk of “passing emotion,” and to forget how vivid the emotion
was ere it passed. Our impulse to sneer, to forget, is at root a good
one. We recognise that emotion is not enough, and that men and women are
personalities capable of sustained relations, not mere opportunities for
an electrical discharge. Yet we rate the impulse too highly. We do not
admit that by collisions of this trivial sort the doors of heaven may be
shaken open. To Helen, at all events, her life was to bring nothing more
intense than the embrace of this boy who played no part in it. He had
drawn her out of the house, where there was danger of surprise and
light; he had led her by a path he knew, until they stood under the
column of the vast wych-elm. A man in the darkness, he had whispered “I
love you” when she was desiring love. In time his slender personality
faded, the scene that he had evoked endured. In all the variable years
that followed she never saw the like of it again.

“I understand,” said Margaret-- “at least, I understand as much as ever
is understood of these things. Tell me now what happened on the Monday
morning.”

“It was over at once.”

“How, Helen?”

“I was still happy while I dressed, but as I came downstairs I got
nervous, and when I went into the dining-room I knew it was no good.
There was Evie--I can’t explain--managing the tea-urn, and Mr. Wilcox
reading the Times.”

“Was Paul there?”

“Yes; and Charles was talking to him about stocks and shares, and he
looked frightened.”

By slight indications the sisters could convey much to each other.
Margaret saw horror latent in the scene, and Helen’s next remark did not
surprise her.

“Somehow, when that kind of man looks frightened it is too awful. It is
all right for us to be frightened, or for men of another sort--father,
for instance; but for men like that! When I saw all the others so
placid, and Paul mad with terror in case I said the wrong thing, I felt
for a moment that the whole Wilcox family was a fraud, just a wall of
newspapers and motor-cars and golf-clubs, and that if it fell I should
find nothing behind it but panic and emptiness.”

“I don’t think that. The Wilcoxes struck me as being genuine people,
particularly the wife.”

“No, I don’t really think that. But Paul was so broad-shouldered; all
kinds of extraordinary things made it worse, and I knew that it would
never do--never. I said to him after breakfast, when the others were
practising strokes, ‘We rather lost our heads,’ and he looked better
at once, though frightfully ashamed. He began a speech about having no
money to marry on, but it hurt him to make it, and I stopped him. Then
he said, ‘I must beg your pardon over this, Miss Schlegel; I can’t think
what came over me last night.’ And I said, ‘Nor what over me; never
mind.’ And then we parted--at least, until I remembered that I had
written straight off to tell you the night before, and that frightened
him again. I asked him to send a telegram for me, for he knew you would
be coming or something; and he tried to get hold of the motor, but
Charles and Mr. Wilcox wanted it to go to the station; and Charles
offered to send the telegram for me, and then I had to say that the
telegram was of no consequence, for Paul said Charles might read it, and
though I wrote it out several times, he always said people would suspect
something. He took it himself at last, pretending that he must walk down
to get cartridges, and, what with one thing and the other, it was not
handed in at the post-office until too late. It was the most terrible
morning. Paul disliked me more and more, and Evie talked cricket
averages till I nearly screamed. I cannot think how I stood her all the
other days. At last Charles and his father started for the station, and
then came your telegram warning me that Aunt Juley was coming by that
train, and Paul--oh, rather horrible--said that I had muddled it. But
Mrs. Wilcox knew.”

“Knew what?”

“Everything; though we neither of us told her a word, and she had known
all along, I think.”

“Oh, she must have overheard you.”

“I suppose so, but it seemed wonderful. When Charles and Aunt Juley
drove up, calling each other names, Mrs. Wilcox stepped in from the
garden and made everything less terrible. Ugh! but it has been a
disgusting business. To think that--” She sighed.

“To think that because you and a young man meet for a moment, there must
be all these telegrams and anger,” supplied Margaret.

Helen nodded.

“I’ve often thought about it, Helen. It’s one of the most interesting
things in the world. The truth is that there is a great outer life that
you and I have never touched--a life in which telegrams and anger count.
Personal relations, that we think supreme, are not supreme there. There
love means marriage settlements, death, death duties. So far I’m clear.
But here my difficulty. This outer life, though obviously horrid; often
seems the real one--there’s grit in it. It does breed character. Do
personal relations lead to sloppiness in the end?”

“Oh, Meg--, that’s what I felt, only not so clearly, when the Wilcoxes
were so competent, and seemed to have their hands on all the ropes.”

“Don’t you feel it now?”

“I remember Paul at breakfast,” said Helen quietly. “I shall never
forget him. He had nothing to fall back upon. I know that personal
relations are the real life, for ever and ever.”

“Amen!”

So the Wilcox episode fell into the background, leaving behind it
memories of sweetness and horror that mingled, and the sisters pursued
the life that Helen had commended. They talked to each other and to
other people, they filled the tall thin house at Wickham Place with
those whom they liked or could befriend. They even attended public
meetings. In their own fashion they cared deeply about politics, though
not as politicians would have us care; they desired that public
life should mirror whatever is good in the life within. Temperance,
tolerance, and sexual equality were intelligible cries to them; whereas
they did not follow our Forward Policy in Tibet with the keen attention
that it merits, and would at times dismiss the whole British Empire with
a puzzled, if reverent, sigh. Not out of them are the shows of history
erected: the world would be a grey, bloodless place were it composed
entirely of Miss Schlegels. But the world being what it is, perhaps they
shine out in it like stars.

A word on their origin. They were not “English to the back-bone,” as
their aunt had piously asserted. But, on the other hand, they were not
“Germans of the dreadful sort.” Their father had belonged to a type that
was more prominent in Germany fifty years ago than now. He was not the
aggressive German, so dear to the English journalist, nor the domestic
German, so dear to the English wit. If one classed him at all it would
be as the countryman of Hegel and Kant, as the idealist, inclined to be
dreamy, whose Imperialism was the Imperialism of the air. Not that
his life had been inactive. He had fought like blazes against Denmark,
Austria, France. But he had fought without visualising the results of
victory. A hint of the truth broke on him after Sedan, when he saw the
dyed moustaches of Napoleon going grey; another when he entered Paris,
and saw the smashed windows of the Tuileries. Peace came--it was all
very immense, one had turned into an Empire--but he knew that some
quality had vanished for which not all Alsace-Lorraine could compensate
him. Germany a commercial Power, Germany a naval Power, Germany with
colonies here and a Forward Policy there, and legitimate aspirations in
the other place, might appeal to others, and be fitly served by
them; for his own part, he abstained from the fruits of victory, and
naturalised himself in England. The more earnest members of his family
never forgave him, and knew that his children, though scarcely English
of the dreadful sort, would never be German to the back-bone. He had
obtained work in one of our provincial universities, and there married
Poor Emily (or Die Englanderin, as the case may be), and as she had
money, they proceeded to London, and came to know a good many people.
But his gaze was always fixed beyond the sea. It was his hope that the
clouds of materialism obscuring the Fatherland would part in time, and
the mild intellectual light re-emerge. “Do you imply that we Germans are
stupid, Uncle Ernst?” exclaimed a haughty and magnificent nephew. Uncle
Ernst replied, “To my mind. You use the intellect, but you no longer
care about it. That I call stupidity.” As the haughty nephew did not
follow, he continued, “You only care about the things that you can use,
and therefore arrange them in the following order: Money, supremely
useful; intellect, rather useful; imagination, of no use at all.
No”--for the other had protested--“your Pan-Germanism is no more
imaginative than is our Imperialism over here. It is the vice of a
vulgar mind to be thrilled by bigness, to think that a thousand square
miles are a thousand times more wonderful than one square mile, and
that a million square miles are almost the same as heaven. That is
not imagination. No, it kills it. When their poets over here try to
celebrate bigness they are dead at once, and naturally. Your poets
too are dying, your philosophers, your musicians, to whom Europe has
listened for two hundred years. Gone. Gone with the little courts that
nurtured them--gone with Esterhazy and Weimar. What? What’s that? Your
universities? Oh yes, you have learned men, who collect more facts
than do the learned men of England. They collect facts, and facts, and
empires of facts. But which of them will rekindle the light within?”

To all this Margaret listened, sitting on the haughty nephew’s knee.

It was a unique education for the little girls. The haughty nephew would
be at Wickham Place one day, bringing with him an even haughtier wife,
both convinced that Germany was appointed by God to govern the world.
Aunt Juley would come the next day, convinced that Great Britain had
been appointed to the same post by the same authority. Were both these
loud-voiced parties right? On one occasion they had met and Margaret
with clasped hands had implored them to argue the subject out in her
presence. Whereat they blushed, and began to talk about the weather.
“Papa,” she cried--she was a most offensive child--“why will they not
discuss this most clear question?” Her father, surveying the parties
grimly, replied that he did not know. Putting her head on one side,
Margaret then remarked, “To me one of two things is very clear; either
God does not know his own mind about England and Germany, or else these
do not know the mind of God.” A hateful little girl, but at thirteen
she had grasped a dilemma that most people travel through life without
perceiving. Her brain darted up and down; it grew pliant and strong. Her
conclusion was, that any human being lies nearer to the unseen than any
organisation, and from this she never varied.

Helen advanced along the same lines, though with a more irresponsible
tread. In character she resembled her sister, but she was pretty, and so
apt to have a more amusing time. People gathered round her more readily,
especially when they were new acquaintances, and she did enjoy a little
homage very much. When their father died and they ruled alone at Wickham
Place, she often absorbed the whole of the company, while Margaret--both
were tremendous talkers--fell flat. Neither sister bothered about this.
Helen never apologised afterwards, Margaret did not feel the slightest
rancour. But looks have their influence upon character. The sisters
were alike as little girls, but at the time of the Wilcox episode their
methods were beginning to diverge; the younger was rather apt to entice
people, and, in enticing them, to be herself enticed; the elder went
straight ahead, and accepted an occasional failure as part of the game.

Little need be premised about Tibby. He was now an intelligent man of
sixteen, but dyspeptic and difficile.



CHAPTER V

It will be generally admitted that Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony is the
most sublime noise that has ever penetrated into the ear of man. All
sorts and conditions are satisfied by it. Whether you are like Mrs.
Munt, and tap surreptitiously when the tunes come--of course, not so as
to disturb the others--or like Helen, who can see heroes and shipwrecks
in the music’s flood; or like Margaret, who can only see the music; or
like Tibby, who is profoundly versed in counterpoint, and holds the full
score open on his knee; or like their cousin, Fraulein Mosebach, who
remembers all the time that Beethoven is echt Deutsch; or like Fraulein
Mosebach’s young man, who can remember nothing but Fraulein Mosebach: in
any case, the passion of your life becomes more vivid, and you are bound
to admit that such a noise is cheap at two shillings. It is cheap, even
if you hear it in the Queen’s Hall, dreariest music-room in London,
though not as dreary as the Free Trade Hall, Manchester; and even if
you sit on the extreme left of that hall, so that the brass bumps at you
before the rest of the orchestra arrives, it is still cheap.

“Whom is Margaret talking to?” said Mrs. Munt, at the conclusion of the
first movement. She was again in London on a visit to Wickham Place.

Helen looked down the long line of their party, and said that she did
not know.

“Would it be some young man or other whom she takes an interest in?”

“I expect so,” Helen replied. Music enwrapped her, and she could not
enter into the distinction that divides young men whom one takes an
interest in from young men whom one knows.

“You girls are so wonderful in always having--Oh dear! one mustn’t
talk.”

For the Andante had begun--very beautiful, but bearing a family likeness
to all the other beautiful Andantes that Beethoven had written, and,
to Helen’s mind, rather disconnecting the heroes and shipwrecks of the
first movement from the heroes and goblins of the third. She heard the
tune through once, and then her attention wandered, and she gazed at the
audience, or the organ, or the architecture. Much did she censure
the attenuated Cupids who encircle the ceiling of the Queen’s
Hall, inclining each to each with vapid gesture, and clad in sallow
pantaloons, on which the October sunlight struck. “How awful to marry a
man like those Cupids!” thought Helen. Here Beethoven started decorating
his tune, so she heard him through once more, and then she smiled at
her Cousin Frieda. But Frieda, listening to Classical Music, could not
respond. Herr Liesecke, too, looked as if wild horses could not make him
inattentive; there were lines across his forehead, his lips were parted,
his pince-nez at right angles to his nose, and he had laid a thick,
white hand on either knee. And next to her was Aunt Juley, so British,
and wanting to tap. How interesting that row of people was! What diverse
influences had gone to the making! Here Beethoven, after humming and
hawing with great sweetness, said “Heigho,” and the Andante came to an
end. Applause, and a round of “wunderschoning” and pracht volleying from
the German contingent. Margaret started talking to her new young man;
Helen said to her aunt: “Now comes the wonderful movement: first of all
the goblins, and then a trio of elephants dancing”; and Tibby implored
the company generally to look out for the transitional passage on the
drum.

“On the what, dear?”

“On the drum, Aunt Juley.”

“No; look out for the part where you think you have done with the
goblins and they come back,” breathed Helen, as the music started with
a goblin walking quietly over the universe, from end to end. Others
followed him. They were not aggressive creatures; it was that that made
them so terrible to Helen. They merely observed in passing that there
was no such thing as splendour or heroism in the world. After the
interlude of elephants dancing, they returned and made the observation
for the second time. Helen could not contradict them, for, once at all
events, she had felt the same, and had seen the reliable walls of youth
collapse. Panic and emptiness! Panic and emptiness! The goblins were
right. Her brother raised his finger; it was the transitional passage on
the drum.

For, as if things were going too far, Beethoven took hold of the goblins
and made them do what he wanted. He appeared in person. He gave them
a little push, and they began to walk in a major key instead of in a
minor, and then--he blew with his mouth and they were scattered! Gusts
of splendour, gods and demigods contending with vast swords, colour
and fragrance broadcast on the field of battle, magnificent victory,
magnificent death! Oh, it all burst before the girl, and she even
stretched out her gloved hands as if it was tangible. Any fate was
titanic; any contest desirable; conqueror and conquered would alike be
applauded by the angels of the utmost stars.

And the goblins--they had not really been there at all? They were only
the phantoms of cowardice and unbelief? One healthy human impulse would
dispel them? Men like the Wilcoxes, or ex-President Roosevelt, would
say yes. Beethoven knew better. The goblins really had been there. They
might return--and they did. It was as if the splendour of life might
boil over and waste to steam and froth. In its dissolution one heard the
terrible, ominous note, and a goblin, with increased malignity, walked
quietly over the universe from end to end. Panic and emptiness! Panic
and emptiness! Even the flaming ramparts of the world might fall.
Beethoven chose to make all right in the end. He built the ramparts up.
He blew with his mouth for the second time, and again the goblins were
scattered. He brought back the gusts of splendour, the heroism, the
youth, the magnificence of life and of death, and, amid vast roarings of
a superhuman joy, he led his Fifth Symphony to its conclusion. But the
goblins were there. They could return. He had said so bravely, and that
is why one can trust Beethoven when he says other things.

Helen pushed her way out during the applause. She desired to be alone.
The music had summed up to her all that had happened or could happen in
her career.

She read it as a tangible statement, which could never be superseded.
The notes meant this and that to her, and they could have no other
meaning, and life could have no other meaning. She pushed right out of
the building and walked slowly down the outside staircase, breathing the
autumnal air, and then she strolled home.

“Margaret,” called Mrs. Munt, “is Helen all right?”

“Oh yes.”

“She is always going away in the middle of a programme,” said Tibby.

“The music has evidently moved her deeply,” said Fraulein Mosebach.

“Excuse me,” said Margaret’s young man, who had for some time been
preparing a sentence, “but that lady has, quite inadvertently, taken my
umbrella.”

“Oh, good gracious me!--I am so sorry. Tibby, run after Helen.”

“I shall miss the Four Serious Songs if I do.”

“Tibby, love, you must go.”

“It isn’t of any consequence,” said the young man, in truth a little
uneasy about his umbrella.

“But of course it is. Tibby! Tibby!”

Tibby rose to his feet, and wilfully caught his person on the backs of
the chairs. By the time he had tipped up the seat and had found his
hat, and had deposited his full score in safety, it was “too late” to
go after Helen. The Four Serious Songs had begun, and one could not move
during their performance.

“My sister is so careless,” whispered Margaret.

“Not at all,” replied the young man; but his voice was dead and cold.

“If you would give me your address--”

“Oh, not at all, not at all;” and he wrapped his greatcoat over his
knees.

Then the Four Serious Songs rang shallow in Margaret’s ears. Brahms, for
all his grumbling and grizzling, had never guessed what it felt like
to be suspected of stealing an umbrella. For this fool of a young man
thought that she and Helen and Tibby had been playing the confidence
trick on him, and that if he gave his address they would break into
his rooms some midnight or other and steal his walking-stick too. Most
ladies would have laughed, but Margaret really minded, for it gave her
a glimpse into squalor. To trust people is a luxury in which only the
wealthy can indulge; the poor cannot afford it. As soon as Brahms had
grunted himself out, she gave him her card and said, “That is where
we live; if you preferred, you could call for the umbrella after the
concert, but I didn’t like to trouble you when it has all been our
fault.”

His face brightened a little when he saw that Wickham Place was W. It
was sad to see him corroded with suspicion, and yet not daring to be
impolite, in case these well-dressed people were honest after all. She
took it as a good sign that he said to her, “It’s a fine programme
this afternoon, is it not?” for this was the remark with which he had
originally opened, before the umbrella intervened.

“The Beethoven’s fine,” said Margaret, who was not a female of the
encouraging type. “I don’t like the Brahms, though, nor the Mendelssohn
that came first and ugh! I don’t like this Elgar that’s coming.”

“What, what?” called Herr Liesecke, overhearing. “The ‘Pomp and
Circumstance’ will not be fine?”

“Oh, Margaret, you tiresome girl!” cried her aunt.

“Here have I been persuading Herr Liesecke to stop for ‘Pomp and
Circumstance,’ and you are undoing all my work. I am so anxious for him
to hear what WE are doing in music. Oh,--you musn’t run down our English
composers, Margaret.”

“For my part, I have heard the composition at Stettin,” said Fraulein
Mosebach, “on two occasions. It is dramatic, a little.”

“Frieda, you despise English music. You know you do. And English art.
And English literature, except Shakespeare, and he’s a German. Very
well, Frieda, you may go.”

The lovers laughed and glanced at each other. Moved by a common impulse,
they rose to their feet and fled from “Pomp and Circumstance.”

“We have this call to pay in Finsbury Circus, it is true,” said Herr
Liesecke, as he edged past her and reached the gangway just as the music
started.

“Margaret--” loudly whispered by Aunt Juley.

“Margaret, Margaret! Fraulein Mosebach has left her beautiful little bag
behind her on the seat.”

Sure enough, there was Frieda’s reticule, containing her address book,
her pocket dictionary, her map of London, and her money.

“Oh, what a bother--what a family we are! Fr--frieda!”

“Hush!” said all those who thought the music fine.

“But it’s the number they want in Finsbury Circus.”

“Might I--couldn’t I--” said the suspicious young man, and got very red.

“Oh, I would be so grateful.”

He took the bag--money clinking inside it--and slipped up the gangway
with it. He was just in time to catch them at the swing-door, and he
received a pretty smile from the German girl and a fine bow from her
cavalier. He returned to his seat upsides with the world. The trust that
they had reposed in him was trivial, but he felt that it cancelled his
mistrust for them, and that probably he would not be “had” over his
umbrella. This young man had been “had” in the past badly, perhaps
overwhelmingly--and now most of his energies went in defending himself
against the unknown. But this afternoon--perhaps on account of music--he
perceived that one must slack off occasionally or what is the good
of being alive? Wickham Place, W., though a risk, was as safe as most
things, and he would risk it.

So when the concert was over and Margaret said, “We live quite near; I
am going there now. Could you walk round with me, and we’ll find your
umbrella?” he said, “Thank you,” peaceably, and followed her out of
the Queen’s Hall. She wished that he was not so anxious to hand a lady
downstairs, or to carry a lady’s programme for her--his class was near
enough her own for its manners to vex her. But she found him interesting
on the whole--every one interested the Schlegels on the whole at that
time--and while her lips talked culture, her heart was planning to
invite him to tea.

“How tired one gets after music!” she began.

“Do you find the atmosphere of Queen’s Hall oppressive?”

“Yes, horribly.”

“But surely the atmosphere of Covent Garden is even more oppressive.”

“Do you go there much?”

“When my work permits, I attend the gallery for the Royal Opera.”

Helen would have exclaimed, “So do I. I love the gallery,” and thus
have endeared herself to the young man. Helen could do these things. But
Margaret had an almost morbid horror of “drawing people out,” of “making
things go.” She had been to the gallery at Covent Garden, but she did
not “attend” it, preferring the more expensive seats; still less did she
love it. So she made no reply.

“This year I have been three times--to ‘Faust,’ ‘Tosca,’ and--” Was it
“Tannhouser” or “Tannhoyser”? Better not risk the word.

Margaret disliked “Tosca” and “Faust.” And so, for one reason and
another, they walked on in silence, chaperoned by the voice of Mrs.
Munt, who was getting into difficulties with her nephew.

“I do in a WAY remember the passage, Tibby, but when every instrument is
so beautiful, it is difficult to pick out one thing rather than another.
I am sure that you and Helen take me to the very nicest concerts. Not a
dull note from beginning to end. I only wish that our German friends had
stayed till it finished.”

“But surely you haven’t forgotten the drum steadily beating on the low
C, Aunt Juley?” came Tibby’s voice. “No one could. It’s unmistakable.”

“A specially loud part?” hazarded Mrs. Munt. “Of course I do not go
in for being musical,” she added, the shot failing. “I only care for
music--a very different thing. But still I will say this for myself--I
do know when I like a thing and when I don’t. Some people are the same
about pictures. They can go into a picture gallery--Miss Conder can--and
say straight off what they feel, all round the wall. I never could do
that. But music is so different from pictures, to my mind. When it comes
to music I am as safe as houses, and I assure you, Tibby, I am by no
means pleased by everything. There was a thing--something about a faun
in French--which Helen went into ecstasies over, but I thought it most
tinkling and superficial, and said so, and I held to my opinion too.”

“Do you agree?” asked Margaret. “Do you think music is so different from
pictures?”

“I--I should have thought so, kind of,” he said.

“So should I. Now, my sister declares they’re just the same. We have
great arguments over it. She says I’m dense; I say she’s sloppy.”
 Getting under way, she cried: “Now, doesn’t it seem absurd to you? What
is the good of the Arts if they’re interchangeable? What is the good
of the ear if it tells you the same as the eye? Helen’s one aim is to
translate tunes into the language of painting, and pictures into the
language of music. It’s very ingenious, and she says several pretty
things in the process, but what’s gained, I’d like to know? Oh, it’s
all rubbish, radically false. If Monet’s really Debussy, and Debussy’s
really Monet, neither gentleman is worth his salt--that’s my opinion.”

Evidently these sisters quarrelled.

“Now, this very symphony that we’ve just been having--she won’t let it
alone. She labels it with meanings from start to finish; turns it into
literature. I wonder if the day will ever return when music will be
treated as music. Yet I don’t know. There’s my brother--behind us. He
treats music as music, and oh, my goodness! He makes me angrier than any
one, simply furious. With him I daren’t even argue.”

An unhappy family, if talented.

“But, of course, the real villain is Wagner. He has done more than any
man in the nineteenth century towards the muddling of the arts. I
do feel that music is in a very serious state just now, though
extraordinarily interesting. Every now and then in history there do
come these terrible geniuses, like Wagner, who stir up all the wells of
thought at once. For a moment it’s splendid. Such a splash as never
was. But afterwards--such a lot of mud; and the wells--as it were, they
communicate with each other too easily now, and not one of them will run
quite clear. That’s what Wagner’s done.”

Her speeches fluttered away from the young man like birds. If only he
could talk like this, he would have caught the world. Oh, to acquire
culture! Oh, to pronounce foreign names correctly! Oh, to be well
informed, discoursing at ease on every subject that a lady started! But
it would take one years. With an hour at lunch and a few shattered hours
in the evening, how was it possible to catch up with leisured women,
who had been reading steadily from childhood? His brain might be full
of names, he might have even heard of Monet and Debussy; the trouble
was that he could not string them together into a sentence, he could not
make them “tell,” he could not quite forget about his stolen umbrella.
Yes, the umbrella was the real trouble. Behind Monet and Debussy the
umbrella persisted, with the steady beat of a drum. “I suppose my
umbrella will be all right,” he was thinking. “I don’t really mind about
it. I will think about music instead. I suppose my umbrella will be all
right.” Earlier in the afternoon he had worried about seats. Ought he
to have paid as much as two shillings? Earlier still he had wondered,
“Shall I try to do without a programme?” There had always been something
to worry him ever since he could remember, always something that
distracted him in the pursuit of beauty. For he did pursue beauty, and,
therefore, Margaret’s speeches did flutter away from him like birds.

Margaret talked ahead, occasionally saying, “Don’t you think so? don’t
you feel the same?” And once she stopped, and said, “Oh, do interrupt
me!” which terrified him. She did not attract him, though she filled him
with awe. Her figure was meagre, her face seemed all teeth and eyes, her
references to her sister and her brother were uncharitable. For all
her cleverness and culture, she was probably one of those soulless,
atheistical women who have been so shown up by Miss Corelli. It was
surprising (and alarming) that she should suddenly say, “I do hope that
you’ll come in and have some tea. We should be so glad. I have dragged
you so far out of your way.”

They had arrived at Wickham Place. The sun had set, and the backwater,
in deep shadow, was filling with a gentle haze. To the right the
fantastic sky-line of the flats towered black against the hues of
evening; to the left the older houses raised a square-cut, irregular
parapet against the grey. Margaret fumbled for her latch-key. Of course
she had forgotten it. So, grasping her umbrella by its ferrule, she
leant over the area and tapped at the dining-room window.

“Helen! Let us in!”

“All right,” said a voice.

“You’ve been taking this gentleman’s umbrella.”

“Taken a what?” said Helen, opening the door. “Oh, what’s that? Do come
in! How do you do?”

“Helen, you must not be so ramshackly. You took this gentleman’s
umbrella away from Queen’s Hall, and he has had the trouble of coming
round for it.”

“Oh, I am so sorry!” cried Helen, all her hair flying. She had pulled
off her hat as soon as she returned, and had flung herself into the
big dining-room chair. “I do nothing but steal umbrellas. I am so very
sorry! Do come in and choose one. Is yours a hooky or a nobbly? Mine’s a
nobbly--at least, I THINK it is.”

The light was turned on, and they began to search the hall, Helen, who
had abruptly parted with the Fifth Symphony, commenting with shrill
little cries.

“Don’t you talk, Meg! You stole an old gentleman’s silk top-hat. Yes,
she did, Aunt Juley. It is a positive fact. She thought it was a muff.
Oh, heavens! I’ve knocked the In-and-Out card down. Where’s Frieda?
Tibby, why don’t you ever--No, I can’t remember what I was going to say.
That wasn’t it, but do tell the maids to hurry tea up. What about this
umbrella?” She opened it. “No, it’s all gone along the seams. It’s an
appalling umbrella. It must be mine.”

But it was not.

He took it from her, murmured a few words of thanks, and then fled, with
the lilting step of the clerk.

“But if you will stop--” cried Margaret. “Now, Helen, how stupid you’ve
been!”

“Whatever have I done?”

“Don’t you see that you’ve frightened him away? I meant him to stop to
tea. You oughtn’t to talk about stealing or holes in an umbrella. I saw
his nice eyes getting so miserable. No, it’s not a bit of good now.” For
Helen had darted out into the street, shouting, “Oh, do stop!”

“I dare say it is all for the best,” opined Mrs. Munt. “We know nothing
about the young man, Margaret, and your drawing-room is full of very
tempting little things.”

But Helen cried: “Aunt Juley, how can you! You make me more and more
ashamed. I’d rather he had been a thief and taken all the apostle spoons
than that I--Well, I must shut the front-door, I suppose. One more
failure for Helen.”

“Yes, I think the apostle spoons could have gone as rent,” said
Margaret. Seeing that her aunt did not understand, she added: “You
remember ‘rent’? It was one of father’s words--Rent to the ideal, to his
own faith in human nature. You remember how he would trust strangers,
and if they fooled him he would say, ‘It’s better to be fooled than to
be suspicious’--that the confidence trick is the work of man, but the
want-of-confidence trick is the work of the devil.”

“I remember something of the sort now,” said Mrs. Munt, rather tartly,
for she longed to add, “It was lucky that your father married a wife
with money.” But this was unkind, and she contented herself with, “Why,
he might have stolen the little Ricketts picture as well.”

“Better that he had,” said Helen stoutly.

“No, I agree with Aunt Juley,” said Margaret. “I’d rather mistrust
people than lose my little Ricketts. There are limits.”

Their brother, finding the incident commonplace, had stolen upstairs to
see whether there were scones for tea. He warmed the teapot--almost too
deftly--rejected the orange pekoe that the parlour-maid had provided,
poured in five spoonfuls of a superior blend, filled up with really
boiling water, and now called to the ladies to be quick or they would
lose the aroma.

“All right, Auntie Tibby,” called Helen, while Margaret, thoughtful
again, said: “In a way, I wish we had a real boy in the house--the kind
of boy who cares for men. It would make entertaining so much easier.”

“So do I,” said her sister. “Tibby only cares for cultured females
singing Brahms.” And when they joined him she said rather sharply: “Why
didn’t you make that young man welcome, Tibby? You must do the host a
little, you know. You ought to have taken his hat and coaxed him into
stopping, instead of letting him be swamped by screaming women.”

Tibby sighed, and drew a long strand of hair over his forehead.

“Oh, it’s no good looking superior. I mean what I say.”

“Leave Tibby alone!” said Margaret, who could not bear her brother to be
scolded.

“Here’s the house a regular hen-coop!” grumbled Helen.

“Oh, my dear!” protested Mrs. Munt. “How can you say such dreadful
things! The number of men you get here has always astonished me. If
there is any danger it’s the other way round.”

“Yes, but it’s the wrong sort of men, Helen means.”

“No, I don’t,” corrected Helen. “We get the right sort of man, but the
wrong side of him, and I say that’s Tibby’s fault. There ought to be a
something about the house--an--I don’t know what.”

“A touch of the W’s, perhaps?”

Helen put out her tongue.

“Who are the W’s?” asked Tibby.

“The W’s are things I and Meg and Aunt Juley know about and you don’t,
so there!”

“I suppose that ours is a female house,” said Margaret, “and one must
just accept it. No, Aunt Juley, I don’t mean that this house is full of
women. I am trying to say something much more clever. I mean that it
was irrevocably feminine, even in father’s time. Now I’m sure you
understand! Well, I’ll give you another example. It’ll shock you, but
I don’t care. Suppose Queen Victoria gave a dinner-party, and that
the guests had been Leighton, Millais, Swinburne, Rossetti, Meredith,
Fitzgerald, etc. Do you suppose that the atmosphere of that dinner would
have been artistic? Heavens, no! The very chairs on which they sat would
have seen to that. So with our house--it must be feminine, and all we
can do is to see that it isn’t effeminate. Just as another house that
I can mention, but won’t, sounded irrevocably masculine, and all its
inmates can do is to see that it isn’t brutal.”

“That house being the W’s house, I presume,” said Tibby.

“You’re not going to be told about the W’s, my child,” Helen cried, “so
don’t you think it. And on the other hand, I don’t the least mind if
you find out, so don’t you think you’ve done anything clever, in either
case. Give me a cigarette.”

“You do what you can for the house,” said Margaret. “The drawing-room
reeks of smoke.”

“If you smoked too, the house might suddenly turn masculine. Atmosphere
is probably a question of touch and go. Even at Queen Victoria’s
dinner-party--if something had been just a little Different--perhaps if
she’d worn a clinging Liberty tea-gown instead of a magenta satin.”

“With an India shawl over her shoulders--”

“Fastened at the bosom with a Cairngorm-pin.”

Bursts of disloyal laughter--you must remember that they are half
German--greeted these suggestions, and Margaret said pensively, “How
inconceivable it would be if the Royal Family cared about Art.” And the
conversation drifted away and away, and Helen’s cigarette turned to
a spot in the darkness, and the great flats opposite were sown with
lighted windows which vanished and were relit again, and vanished
incessantly. Beyond them the thoroughfare roared gently--a tide that
could never be quiet, while in the east, invisible behind the smokes of
Wapping, the moon was rising.

“That reminds me, Margaret. We might have taken that young man into
the dining-room, at all events. Only the majolica plate--and that is so
firmly set in the wall. I am really distressed that he had no tea.”

For that little incident had impressed the three women more than might
be supposed. It remained as a goblin footfall, as a hint that all is not
for the best in the best of all possible worlds, and that beneath these
superstructures of wealth and art there wanders an ill-fed boy, who has
recovered his umbrella indeed, but who has left no address behind him,
and no name.



CHAPTER VI

WE are not concerned with the very poor. They are unthinkable and only
to be approached by the statistician or the poet. This story deals
with gentlefolk, or with those who are obliged to pretend that they are
gentlefolk.

The boy, Leonard Bast, stood at the extreme verge of gentility. He was
not in the abyss, but he could see it, and at times people whom he knew
had dropped in, and counted no more. He knew that he was poor, and would
admit it; he would have died sooner than confess any inferiority to
the rich. This may be splendid of him. But he was inferior to most rich
people, there is not the least doubt of it. He was not as courteous
as the average rich man, nor as intelligent, nor as healthy, nor as
lovable. His mind and his body had been alike underfed, because he was
poor, and because he was modern they were always craving better food.
Had he lived some centuries ago, in the brightly coloured civilisations
of the past, he would have had a definite status, his rank and his
income would have corresponded. But in his day the angel of Democracy
had arisen, enshadowing the classes with leathern wings, and
proclaiming, “All men are equal--all men, that is to say, who possess
umbrellas,” and so he was obliged to assert gentility, lest he slip
into the abyss where nothing counts, and the statements of Democracy are
inaudible.

As he walked away from Wickham Place, his first care was to prove that
he was as good as the Miss Schlegels. Obscurely wounded in his pride, he
tried to wound them in return. They were probably not ladies. Would real
ladies have asked him to tea? They were certainly ill-natured and cold.
At each step his feeling of superiority increased. Would a real lady
have talked about stealing an umbrella? Perhaps they were thieves
after all, and if he had gone into the house they would have clapped a
chloroformed handkerchief over his face. He walked on complacently as
far as the Houses of Parliament. There an empty stomach asserted itself,
and told him that he was a fool.

“Evening, Mr. Bast.”

“Evening, Mr. Dealtry.”

“Nice evening.”

“Evening.”

Mr. Dealtry, a fellow clerk, passed on, and Leonard stood wondering
whether he would take the tram as far as a penny would take him, or
whether he would walk. He decided to walk--it is no good giving in,
and he had spent money enough at Queen’s Hall--and he walked over
Westminster Bridge, in front of St. Thomas’s Hospital, and through
the immense tunnel that passes under the South-Western main line at
Vauxhall. In the tunnel he paused and listened to the roar of the
trains. A sharp pain darted through his head, and he was conscious of
the exact form of his eye sockets. He pushed on for another mile, and
did not slacken speed until he stood at the entrance of a road called
Camelia Road which was at present his home.

Here he stopped again, and glanced suspiciously to right and left,
like a rabbit that is going to bolt into its hole. A block of flats,
constructed with extreme cheapness, towered on either hand. Farther down
the road two more blocks were being built, and beyond these an old house
was being demolished to accommodate another pair. It was the kind
of scene that may be observed all over London, whatever the
locality--bricks and mortar rising and falling with the restlessness of
the water in a fountain as the city receives more and more men upon her
soil. Camelia Road would soon stand out like a fortress, and command,
for a little, an extensive view. Only for a little. Plans were out for
the erection of flats in Magnolia Road also. And again a few years, and
all the flats in either road might be pulled down, and new buildings, of
a vastness at present unimaginable, might arise where they had fallen.

“Evening, Mr. Bast.”

“Evening, Mr. Cunningham.”

“Very serious thing this decline of the birth-rate in Manchester.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Very serious thing this decline of the birth-rate in Manchester,”
 repeated Mr. Cunningham, tapping the Sunday paper, in which the calamity
in question had just been announced to him.

“Ah, yes,” said Leonard, who was not going to let on that he had not
bought a Sunday paper.

“If this kind of thing goes on the population of England will be
stationary in 1960.”

“You don’t say so.”

“I call it a very serious thing, eh?”

“Good-evening, Mr. Cunningham.”

“Good-evening, Mr. Bast.”

Then Leonard entered Block B of the flats, and turned, not upstairs,
but down, into what is known to house agents as a semi-basement, and to
other men as a cellar. He opened the door, and cried, “Hullo!” with
the pseudo geniality of the Cockney. There was no reply. “Hullo!” he
repeated. The sitting-room was empty, though the electric light had been
left burning. A look of relief came over his face, and he flung himself
into the armchair.

The sitting-room contained, besides the armchair, two other chairs, a
piano, a three-legged table, and a cosy corner. Of the walls, one was
occupied by the window, the other by a draped mantelshelf bristling
with Cupids. Opposite the window was the door, and beside the door a
bookcase, while over the piano there extended one of the masterpieces of
Maud Goodman. It was an amorous and not unpleasant little hole when the
curtains were drawn, and the lights turned on, and the gas-stove unlit.
But it struck that shallow makeshift note that is so often heard in the
dwelling-place. It had been too easily gained, and could be relinquished
too easily.

As Leonard was kicking off his boots he jarred the three-legged table,
and a photograph frame, honourably poised upon it, slid sideways, fell
off into the fireplace, and smashed. He swore in a colourless sort of
way, and picked the photograph up. It represented a young lady called
Jacky, and had been taken at the time when young ladies called Jacky
were often photographed with their mouths open. Teeth of dazzling
whiteness extended along either of Jacky’s jaws, and positively weighed
her head sideways, so large were they and so numerous. Take my word for
it, that smile was simply stunning, and it is only you and I who will be
fastidious, and complain that true joy begins in the eyes, and that
the eyes of Jacky did not accord with her smile, but were anxious and
hungry.

Leonard tried to pull out the fragments of glass, and cut his fingers
and swore again. A drop of blood fell on the frame, another followed,
spilling over on to the exposed photograph. He swore more vigorously,
and dashed into the kitchen, where he bathed his hands. The kitchen
was the same size as the sitting-room; beyond it was a bedroom. This
completed his home. He was renting the flat furnished; of all the
objects that encumbered it none were his own except the photograph
frame, the Cupids, and the books.

“Damn, damn, damnation!” he murmured, together with such other words as
he had learnt from older men. Then he raised his hand to his forehead
and said, “Oh, damn it all--” which meant something different. He pulled
himself together. He drank a little tea, black and silent, that still
survived upon an upper shelf. He swallowed some dusty crumbs of a cake.
Then he went back to the sitting-room, settled himself anew, and began
to read a volume of Ruskin.

“Seven miles to the north of Venice--”

How perfectly the famous chapter opens! How supreme its command of
admonition and of poetry! The rich man is speaking to us from his
gondola.

“Seven miles to the north of Venice the banks of sand which nearer the
city rise little above low-water mark attain by degrees a higher level,
and knit themselves at last into fields of salt morass, raised here and
there into shapeless mounds, and intercepted by narrow creeks of sea.”

Leonard was trying to form his style on Ruskin; he understood him to
be the greatest master of English Prose. He read forward steadily,
occasionally making a few notes.

“Let us consider a little each of these characters in succession, and
first (for of the shafts enough has been said already), what is very
peculiar to this church--its luminousness.”

Was there anything to be learnt from this fine sentence? Could he
adapt it to the needs of daily life? Could he introduce it, with
modifications, when he next wrote a letter to his brother, the
lay-reader? For example:

“Let us consider a little each of these characters in succession, and
first (for of the absence of ventilation enough has been said already),
what is very peculiar to this flat--its obscurity.”

Something told him that the modifications would not do; and that
something, had he known it, was the spirit of English Prose. “My flat is
dark as well as stuffy.” Those were the words for him.

And the voice in the gondola rolled on, piping melodiously of Effort
and Self-Sacrifice, full of high purpose, full of beauty, full even of
sympathy and the love of men, yet somehow eluding all that was actual
and insistent in Leonard’s life. For it was the voice of one who had
never been dirty or hungry, and had not guessed successfully what dirt
and hunger are.

Leonard listened to it with reverence. He felt that he was being done
good to, and that if he kept on with Ruskin, and the Queen’s Hall
Concerts, and some pictures by Watts, he would one day push his head
out of the grey waters and see the universe. He believed in sudden
conversion, a belief which may be right, but which is peculiarly
attractive to a half-baked mind. It is the basis of much popular
religion; in the domain of business it dominates the Stock Exchange,
and becomes that “bit of luck” by which all successes and failures are
explained. “If only I had a bit of luck, the whole thing would come
straight... He’s got a most magnificent place down at Streatham and a 20
h.p. Fiat, but then, mind you, he’s had luck... I’m sorry the wife’s
so late, but she never has any luck over catching trains.” Leonard
was superior to these people; he did believe in effort and in a steady
preparation for the change that he desired. But of a heritage that may
expand gradually, he had no conception; he hoped to come to Culture
suddenly, much as the Revivalist hopes to come to Jesus. Those Miss
Schlegels had come to it; they had done the trick; their hands were upon
the ropes, once and for all. And meanwhile, his flat was dark, as well
as stuffy.

Presently there was a noise on the staircase. He shut up Margaret’s card
in the pages of Ruskin, and opened the door. A woman entered, of whom
it is simplest to say that she was not respectable. Her appearance was
awesome. She seemed all strings and bell-pulls--ribbons, chains, bead
necklaces that clinked and caught and a boa of azure feathers hung round
her neck, with the ends uneven. Her throat was bare, wound with a double
row of pearls, her arms were bare to the elbows, and might again
be detected at the shoulder, through cheap lace. Her hat, which was
flowery, resembled those punnets, covered with flannel, which we sowed
with mustard and cress in our childhood, and which germinated here yes,
and there no. She wore it on the back of her head. As for her hair, or
rather hairs, they are too complicated to describe, but one system went
down her back, lying in a thick pad there, while another, created for
a lighter destiny, rippled around her forehead. The face--the face does
not signify. It was the face of the photograph, but older, and the teeth
were not so numerous as the photographer had suggested, and certainly
not so white. Yes, Jacky was past her prime, whatever that prime
may have been. She was descending quicker than most women into the
colourless years, and the look in her eyes confessed it.

“What ho!” said Leonard, greeting the apparition with much spirit, and
helping it off with its boa.

Jacky, in husky tones, replied, “What ho!”

“Been out?” he asked. The question sounds superfluous, but it cannot
have been really, for the lady answered, “No,” adding, “Oh, I am so
tired.”

“You tired?”

“Eh?”

“I’m tired,” said he, hanging the boa up.

“Oh, Len, I am so tired.”

“I’ve been to that classical concert I told you about,” said Leonard.

“What’s that?”

“I came back as soon as it was over.”

“Any one been round to our place?” asked Jacky.

“Not that I’ve seen. I met Mr. Cunningham outside, and we passed a few
remarks.”

“What, not Mr. Cunningham?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, you mean Mr. Cunningham.”

“Yes. Mr. Cunningham.”

“I’ve been out to tea at a lady friend’s.”

Her secret being at last given--to the world, and the name of the lady
friend being even adumbrated, Jacky made no further experiments in the
difficult and tiring art of conversation. She never had been a great
talker. Even in her photographic days she had relied upon her smile and
her figure to attract, and now that she was

      “On the shelf,
       On the shelf,
       Boys, boys, I’m on the shelf,”

she was not likely to find her tongue. Occasional bursts of song (of
which the above is an example) still issued from her lips, but the
spoken word was rare.

She sat down on Leonard’s knee, and began to fondle him. She was now a
massive woman of thirty-three, and her weight hurt him, but he could not
very well say anything. Then she said, “Is that a book you’re reading?”
 and he said, “That’s a book,” and drew it from her unreluctant grasp.
Margaret’s card fell out of it. It fell face downwards, and he murmured,
“Bookmarker.”

“Len--”

“What is it?” he asked, a little wearily, for she only had one topic of
conversation when she sat upon his knee.

“You do love me?”

“Jacky, you know that I do. How can you ask such questions!”

“But you do love me, Len, don’t you?”

“Of course I do.”

A pause. The other remark was still due.

“Len--”

“Well? What is it?”

“Len, you will make it all right?”

“I can’t have you ask me that again,” said the boy, flaring up into a
sudden passion. “I’ve promised to marry you when I’m of age, and that’s
enough. My word’s my word. I’ve promised to marry you as soon as ever
I’m twenty-one, and I can’t keep on being worried. I’ve worries enough.
It isn’t likely I’d throw you over, let alone my word, when I’ve spent
all this money. Besides, I’m an Englishman, and I never go back on my
word. Jacky, do be reasonable. Of course I’ll marry you. Only do stop
badgering me.”

“When’s your birthday, Len?”

“I’ve told you again and again, the eleventh of November next. Now get
off my knee a bit; some one must get supper, I suppose.”

Jacky went through to the bedroom, and began to see to her hat. This
meant blowing at it with short sharp puffs. Leonard tidied up the
sitting-room, and began to prepare their evening meal. He put a penny
into the slot of the gas-meter, and soon the flat was reeking with
metallic fumes. Somehow he could not recover his temper, and all the
time he was cooking he continued to complain bitterly.

“It really is too bad when a fellow isn’t trusted. It makes one feel so
wild, when I’ve pretended to the people here that you’re my wife--all
right, all right, you SHALL be my wife--and I’ve bought you the ring to
wear, and I’ve taken this flat furnished, and it’s far more than I can
afford, and yet you aren’t content, and I’ve also not told the truth
when I’ve written home.” He lowered his voice. “He’d stop it.” In a tone
of horror, that was a little luxurious, he repeated: “My brother’d stop
it. I’m going against the whole world, Jacky.

“That’s what I am, Jacky. I don’t take any heed of what any one says. I
just go straight forward, I do. That’s always been my way. I’m not one
of your weak knock-kneed chaps. If a woman’s in trouble, I don’t leave
her in the lurch. That’s not my street. No, thank you.

“I’ll tell you another thing too. I care a good deal about improving
myself by means of Literature and Art, and so getting a wider outlook.
For instance, when you came in I was reading Ruskin’s Stones of Venice.
I don’t say this to boast, but just to show you the kind of man I am. I
can tell you, I enjoyed that classical concert this afternoon.”

To all his moods Jacky remained equally indifferent. When supper was
ready--and not before--she emerged from the bedroom, saying: “But you do
love me, don’t you?”

They began with a soup square, which Leonard had just dissolved in some
hot water. It was followed by the tongue--a freckled cylinder of meat,
with a little jelly at the top, and a great deal of yellow fat at
the bottom--ending with another square dissolved in water (jelly:
pineapple), which Leonard had prepared earlier in the day. Jacky ate
contentedly enough, occasionally looking at her man with those anxious
eyes, to which nothing else in her appearance corresponded, and which
yet seemed to mirror her soul. And Leonard managed to convince his
stomach that it was having a nourishing meal.

After supper they smoked cigarettes and exchanged a few statements.
She observed that her “likeness” had been broken. He found occasion to
remark, for the second time, that he had come straight back home after
the concert at Queen’s Hall. Presently she sat upon his knee. The
inhabitants of Camelia Road tramped to and fro outside the window,
just on a level with their heads, and the family in the flat on the
ground-floor began to sing, “Hark, my soul, it is the Lord.”

“That tune fairly gives me the hump,” said Leonard.

Jacky followed this, and said that, for her part, she thought it a
lovely tune.

“No; I’ll play you something lovely. Get up, dear, for a minute.”

He went to the piano and jingled out a little Grieg. He played badly and
vulgarly, but the performance was not without its effect, for Jacky
said she thought she’d be going to bed. As she receded, a new set of
interests possessed the boy, and he began to think of what had been said
about music by that odd Miss Schlegel--the one that twisted her face
about so when she spoke. Then the thoughts grew sad and envious. There
was the girl named Helen, who had pinched his umbrella, and the German
girl who had smiled at him pleasantly, and Herr some one, and Aunt some
one, and the brother--all, all with their hands on the ropes. They had
all passed up that narrow, rich staircase at Wickham Place to some ample
room, whither he could never follow them, not if he read for ten hours
a day. Oh, it was no good, this continual aspiration. Some are born
cultured; the rest had better go in for whatever comes easy. To see life
steadily and to see it whole was not for the likes of him.

From the darkness beyond the kitchen a voice called, “Len?”

“You in bed?” he asked, his forehead twitching.

“All right.”

Presently she called him again.

“I must clean my boots ready for the morning,” he answered.

Presently she called him again.

“I rather want to get this chapter done.”

“What?”

He closed his ears against her.

“What’s that?”

“All right, Jacky, nothing; I’m reading a book.”

“What?”

“What?” he answered, catching her degraded deafness.

Presently she called him again.

Ruskin had visited Torcello by this time, and was ordering his
gondoliers to take him to Murano. It occurred to him, as he glided over
the whispering lagoons, that the power of Nature could not be shortened
by the folly, nor her beauty altogether saddened by the misery of such
as Leonard.



CHAPTER VII

“Oh, Margaret,” cried her aunt next morning, “such a most unfortunate
thing has happened. I could not get you alone.”

The most unfortunate thing was not very serious. One of the flats in
the ornate block opposite had been taken furnished by the Wilcox family,
“coming up, no doubt, in the hope of getting into London society.”
 That Mrs. Munt should be the first to discover the misfortune was not
remarkable, for she was so interested in the flats, that she watched
their every mutation with unwearying care. In theory she despised
them--they took away that old-world look--they cut off the sun--flats
house a flashy type of person. But if the truth had been known, she
found her visits to Wickham Place twice as amusing since Wickham
Mansions had arisen, and would in a couple of days learn more about
them than her nieces in a couple of months, or her nephew in a couple
of years. She would stroll across and make friends with the porters, and
inquire what the rents were, exclaiming for example: “What! a hundred
and twenty for a basement? You’ll never get it!” And they would answer:
“One can but try, madam.” The passenger lifts, the arrangement for coals
(a great temptation for a dishonest porter), were all familiar matters
to her, and perhaps a relief from the politico-economical-esthetic
atmosphere that reigned at the Schlegels.

Margaret received the information calmly, and did not agree that it
would throw a cloud over poor Helen’s life.

“Oh, but Helen isn’t a girl with no interests,” she explained. “She has
plenty of other things and other people to think about. She made a false
start with the Wilcoxes, and she’ll be as willing as we are to have
nothing more to do with them.”

“For a clever girl, dear, how very oddly you do talk. Helen’ll HAVE to
have something more to do with them, now that they’re all opposite. She
may meet that Paul in the street. She cannot very well not bow.”

“Of course she must bow. But look here; let’s do the flowers. I was
going to say, the will to be interested in him has died, and what else
matters? I look on that disastrous episode (over which you were so
kind) as the killing of a nerve in Helen. It’s dead, and she’ll never be
troubled with it again. The only things that matter are the things
that interest one. Bowing, even calling and leaving cards, even a
dinner-party--we can do all those things to the Wilcoxes, if they find
it agreeable; but the other thing, the one important thing--never again.
Don’t you see?”

Mrs. Munt did not see, and indeed Margaret was making a most
questionable statement--that any emotion, any interest once vividly
aroused, can wholly die.

“I also have the honour to inform you that the Wilcoxes are bored with
us. I didn’t tell you at the time--it might have made you angry, and you
had enough to worry you--but I wrote a letter to Mrs. W, and apologised
for the trouble that Helen had given them. She didn’t answer it.”

“How very rude!”

“I wonder. Or was it sensible?”

“No, Margaret, most rude.”

“In either case one can class it as reassuring.”

Mrs. Munt sighed. She was going back to Swanage on the morrow, just as
her nieces were wanting her most. Other regrets crowded upon her: for
instance, how magnificently she would have cut Charles if she had met
him face to face. She had already seen him, giving an order to the
porter--and very common he looked in a tall hat. But unfortunately his
back was turned to her, and though she had cut his back, she could not
regard this as a telling snub.

“But you will be careful, won’t you?” she exhorted.

“Oh, certainly. Fiendishly careful.”

“And Helen must be careful, too.”

“Careful over what?” cried Helen, at that moment coming into the room
with her cousin.

“Nothing” said Margaret, seized with a momentary awkwardness.

“Careful over what, Aunt Juley?”

Mrs. Munt assumed a cryptic air. “It is only that a certain family,
whom we know by name but do not mention, as you said yourself last
night after the concert, have taken the flat opposite from the
Mathesons--where the plants are in the balcony.”

Helen began some laughing reply, and then disconcerted them all by
blushing. Mrs. Munt was so disconcerted that she exclaimed, “What,
Helen, you don’t mind them coming, do you?” and deepened the blush to
crimson.

“Of course I don’t mind,” said Helen a little crossly. “It is that you
and Meg are both so absurdly grave about it, when there’s nothing to be
grave about at all.”

“I’m not grave,” protested Margaret, a little cross in her turn.

“Well, you look grave; doesn’t she, Frieda?”

“I don’t feel grave, that’s all I can say; you’re going quite on the
wrong tack.”

“No, she does not feel grave,” echoed Mrs. Munt. “I can bear witness to
that. She disagrees--”

“Hark!” interrupted Fraulein Mosebach. “I hear Bruno entering the hall.”

For Herr Liesecke was due at Wickham Place to call for the two younger
girls. He was not entering the hall--in fact, he did not enter it for
quite five minutes. But Frieda detected a delicate situation, and said
that she and Helen had much better wait for Bruno down below, and
leave Margaret and Mrs. Munt to finish arranging the flowers. Helen
acquiesced. But, as if to prove that the situation was not delicate
really, she stopped in the doorway and said:

“Did you say the Mathesons’ flat, Aunt Juley? How wonderful you are!
I never knew that the name of the woman who laced too tightly was
Matheson.”

“Come, Helen,” said her cousin.

“Go, Helen,” said her aunt; and continued to Margaret almost in the same
breath: “Helen cannot deceive me. She does mind.”

“Oh, hush!” breathed Margaret. “Frieda’ll hear you, and she can be so
tiresome.”

“She minds,” persisted Mrs. Munt, moving thoughtfully about the room,
and pulling the dead chrysanthemums out of the vases. “I knew she’d
mind--and I’m sure a girl ought to! Such an experience! Such awful
coarse-grained people! I know more about them than you do, which you
forget, and if Charles had taken you that motor drive--well, you’d have
reached the house a perfect wreck. Oh, Margaret, you don’t know what
you are in for! They’re all bottled up against the drawing-room window.
There’s Mrs. Wilcox--I’ve seen her. There’s Paul. There’s Evie, who is a
minx. There’s Charles--I saw him to start with. And who would an elderly
man with a moustache and a copper-coloured face be?”

“Mr. Wilcox, possibly.”

“I knew it. And there’s Mr. Wilcox.”

“It’s a shame to call his face copper colour,” complained Margaret. “He
has a remarkably good complexion for a man of his age.”

Mrs. Munt, triumphant elsewhere, could afford to concede Mr. Wilcox
his complexion. She passed on from it to the plan of campaign that her
nieces should pursue in the future. Margaret tried to stop her.

“Helen did not take the news quite as I expected, but the Wilcox nerve
is dead in her really, so there’s no need for plans.”

“It’s as well to be prepared.”

“No--it’s as well not to be prepared.”

“Why?”

“Because--”

Her thought drew being from the obscure borderland. She could not
explain in so many words, but she felt that those who prepare for all
the emergencies of life beforehand may equip themselves at the
expense of joy. It is necessary to prepare for an examination, or
a dinner-party, or a possible fall in the price of stock: those who
attempt human relations must adopt another method, or fail. “Because I’d
sooner risk it,” was her lame conclusion.

“But imagine the evenings,” exclaimed her aunt, pointing to the Mansions
with the spout of the watering can. “Turn the electric light on here
or there, and it’s almost the same room. One evening they may forget to
draw their blinds down, and you’ll see them; and the next, you yours,
and they’ll see you. Impossible to sit out on the balconies. Impossible
to water the plants, or even speak. Imagine going out of the front-door,
and they come out opposite at the same moment. And yet you tell me that
plans are unnecessary, and you’d rather risk it.”

“I hope to risk things all my life.”

“Oh, Margaret, most dangerous.”

“But after all,” she continued with a smile, “there’s never any great
risk as long as you have money.”

“Oh, shame! What a shocking speech!”

“Money pads the edges of things,” said Miss Schlegel. “God help those
who have none.”

“But this is something quite new!” said Mrs. Munt, who collected new
ideas as a squirrel collects nuts, and was especially attracted by those
that are portable.

“New for me; sensible people have acknowledged it for years. You and I
and the Wilcoxes stand upon money as upon islands. It is so firm beneath
our feet that we forget its very existence. It’s only when we see some
one near us tottering that we realise all that an independent income
means. Last night, when we were talking up here round the fire, I began
to think that the very soul of the world is economic, and that the
lowest abyss is not the absence of love, but the absence of coin.”

“I call that rather cynical.”

“So do I. But Helen and I, we ought to remember, when we are tempted to
criticise others, that we are standing on these islands, and that most
of the others are down below the surface of the sea. The poor cannot
always reach those whom they want to love, and they can hardly ever
escape from those whom they love no longer. We rich can. Imagine the
tragedy last June, if Helen and Paul Wilcox had been poor people, and
couldn’t invoke railways and motor-cars to part them.”

“That’s more like Socialism,” said Mrs. Munt suspiciously.

“Call it what you like. I call it going through life with one’s hand
spread open on the table. I’m tired of these rich people who pretend
to be poor, and think it shows a nice mind to ignore the piles of money
that keep their feet above the waves. I stand each year upon six hundred
pounds, and Helen upon the same, and Tibby will stand upon eight, and as
fast as our pounds crumble away into the sea they are renewed--from
the sea, yes, from the sea. And all our thoughts are the thoughts of
six-hundred-pounders, and all our speeches; and because we don’t want to
steal umbrellas ourselves, we forget that below the sea people do want
to steal them and do steal them sometimes, and that what’s a joke up
here is down there reality.”

“There they go--there goes Fraulein Mosebach. Really, for a German she
does dress charmingly. Oh!--”

“What is it?”

“Helen was looking up at the Wilcoxes’ flat.”

“Why shouldn’t she?”

“I beg your pardon, I interrupted you. What was it you were saying about
reality?”

“I had worked round to myself, as usual,” answered Margaret in tones
that were suddenly preoccupied.

“Do tell me this, at all events. Are you for the rich or for the poor?”

“Too difficult. Ask me another. Am I for poverty or for riches? For
riches. Hurrah for riches!”

“For riches!” echoed Mrs. Munt, having, as it were, at last secured her
nut.

“Yes. For riches. Money for ever!”

“So am I, and so, I am afraid, are most of my acquaintances at Swanage,
but I am surprised that you agree with us.”

“Thank you so much, Aunt Juley. While I have talked theories, you have
done the flowers.”

“Not at all, dear. I wish you would let me help you in more important
things.”

“Well, would you be very kind? Would you come round with me to the
registry office? There’s a housemaid who won’t say yes but doesn’t say
no.”

On their way thither they too looked up at the Wilcoxes’ flat. Evie was
in the balcony, “staring most rudely,” according to Mrs. Munt. Oh yes,
it was a nuisance, there was no doubt of it. Helen was proof against
a passing encounter, but--Margaret began to lose confidence. Might it
reawake the dying nerve if the family were living close against her
eyes? And Frieda Mosebach was stopping with them for another fortnight,
and Frieda was sharp, abominably sharp, and quite capable of remarking,
“You love one of the young gentlemen opposite, yes?” The remark would be
untrue, but of the kind which, if stated often enough, may become true;
just as the remark, “England and Germany are bound to fight,” renders
war a little more likely each time that it is made, and is therefore
made the more readily by the gutter press of either nation. Have the
private emotions also their gutter press? Margaret thought so, and
feared that good Aunt Juley and Frieda were typical specimens of it.
They might, by continual chatter, lead Helen into a repetition of the
desires of June. Into a repetition--they could not do more; they
could not lead her into lasting love. They were--she saw it
clearly--Journalism; her father, with all his defects and
wrong-headedness, had been Literature, and had he lived, he would have
persuaded his daughter rightly.

The registry office was holding its morning reception. A string of
carriages filled the street. Miss Schlegel waited her turn, and finally
had to be content with an insidious “temporary,” being rejected by
genuine housemaids on the ground of her numerous stairs. Her failure
depressed her, and though she forgot the failure, the depression
remained. On her way home she again glanced up at the Wilcoxes’ flat,
and took the rather matronly step of speaking about the matter to Helen.

“Helen, you must tell me whether this thing worries you.”

“If what?” said Helen, who was washing her hands for lunch.

“The Ws’ coming.”

“No, of course not.”

“Really?”

“Really.” Then she admitted that she was a little worried on Mrs.
Wilcox’s account; she implied that Mrs. Wilcox might reach backward
into deep feelings, and be pained by things that never touched the other
members of that clan. “I shan’t mind if Paul points at our house and
says, ‘There lives the girl who tried to catch me.’ But she might.”

“If even that worries you, we could arrange something. There’s no reason
we should be near people who displease us or whom we displease, thanks
to our money. We might even go away for a little.”

“Well, I am going away. Frieda’s just asked me to Stettin, and I shan’t
be back till after the New Year. Will that do? Or must I fly the country
altogether? Really, Meg, what has come over you to make such a fuss?”

“Oh, I’m getting an old maid, I suppose. I thought I minded nothing, but
really I--I should be bored if you fell in love with the same man twice
and”--she cleared her throat--“you did go red, you know, when Aunt Juley
attacked you this morning. I shouldn’t have referred to it otherwise.”

But Helen’s laugh rang true, as she raised a soapy hand to heaven and
swore that never, nowhere and nohow, would she again fall in love with
any of the Wilcox family, down to its remotest collaterals.



CHAPTER VIII

The friendship between Margaret and Mrs. Wilcox, which was to develop
so quickly and with such strange results, may perhaps have had its
beginnings at Speyer, in the spring. Perhaps the elder lady, as she
gazed at the vulgar, ruddy cathedral, and listened to the talk of her
husband and Helen, may have detected in the other and less charming of
the sisters a deeper sympathy, a sounder judgment. She was capable
of detecting such things. Perhaps it was she who had desired the Miss
Schlegels to be invited to Howards End, and Margaret whose presence she
had particularly desired. All this is speculation; Mrs. Wilcox has left
few clear indications behind her. It is certain that she came to call at
Wickham Place a fortnight later, the very day that Helen was going with
her cousin to Stettin.

“Helen!” cried Fraulein Mosebach in awestruck tones (she was now in
her cousin’s confidence)--“his mother has forgiven you!” And then,
remembering that in England the new-comer ought not to call before she
is called upon, she changed her tone from awe to disapproval, and opined
that Mrs. Wilcox was keine Dame.

“Bother the whole family!” snapped Margaret. “Helen, stop giggling and
pirouetting, and go and finish your packing. Why can’t the woman leave
us alone?”

“I don’t know what I shall do with Meg,” Helen retorted, collapsing upon
the stairs. “She’s got Wilcox and Box upon the brain. Meg, Meg, I don’t
love the young gentleman; I don’t love the young gentleman, Meg, Meg.
Can a body speak plainer?”

“Most certainly her love has died,” asserted Fraulein Mosebach.

“Most certainly it has, Frieda, but that will not prevent me from being
bored with the Wilcoxes if I return the call.”

Then Helen simulated tears, and Fraulein Mosebach, who thought her
extremely amusing, did the same. “Oh, boo hoo! boo hoo hoo! Meg’s
going to return the call, and I can’t. ‘Cos why? ‘Cos I’m going to
German-eye.”

“If you are going to Germany, go and pack; if you aren’t, go and call on
the Wilcoxes instead of me.”

“But, Meg, Meg, I don’t love the young gentleman; I don’t love the
young--O lud, who’s that coming down the stairs? I vow ‘tis my brother.
O crimini!”

A male--even such a male as Tibby--was enough to stop the foolery. The
barrier of sex, though decreasing among the civilised, is still high,
and higher on the side of women. Helen could tell her sister all, and
her cousin much about Paul; she told her brother nothing. It was not
prudishness, for she now spoke of “the Wilcox ideal” with laughter, and
even with a growing brutality. Nor was it precaution, for Tibby seldom
repeated any news that did not concern himself. It was rather the
feeling that she betrayed a secret into the camp of men, and that,
however trivial it was on this side of the barrier, it would become
important on that. So she stopped, or rather began to fool on other
subjects, until her long-suffering relatives drove her upstairs.
Fraulein Mosebach followed her, but lingered to say heavily over the
banisters to Margaret, “It is all right--she does not love the young
man--he has not been worthy of her.”

“Yes, I know; thanks very much.”

“I thought I did right to tell you.”

“Ever so many thanks.”

“What’s that?” asked Tibby. No one told him, and he proceeded into the
dining-room, to eat plums.

That evening Margaret took decisive action. The house was very quiet,
and the fog--we are in November now--pressed against the windows like an
excluded ghost. Frieda and Helen and all their luggages had gone. Tibby,
who was not feeling well, lay stretched on a sofa by the fire. Margaret
sat by him, thinking. Her mind darted from impulse to impulse, and
finally marshalled them all in review. The practical person, who knows
what he wants at once, and generally knows nothing else, will accuse her
of indecision. But this was the way her mind worked. And when she did
act, no one could accuse her of indecision then. She hit out as lustily
as if she had not considered the matter at all. The letter that she
wrote Mrs. Wilcox glowed with the native hue of resolution. The pale
cast of thought was with her a breath rather than a tarnish, a breath
that leaves the colours all the more vivid when it has been wiped away.


“DEAR MRS. WILCOX,

“I have to write something discourteous. It would be better if we did
not meet. Both my sister and my aunt have given displeasure to your
family, and, in my sister’s case, the grounds for displeasure might
recur. So far as I know she no longer occupies her thoughts with your
son. But it would not be fair, either to her or to you, if they met, and
it is therefore right that our acquaintance, which began so pleasantly,
should end.

“I fear that you will not agree with this; indeed, I know that you
will not, since you have been good enough to call on us. It is only
an instinct on my part, and no doubt the instinct is wrong. My sister
would, undoubtedly, say that it is wrong. I write without her knowledge,
and I hope that you will not associate her with my discourtesy.

“Believe me,

“Yours truly,

“M. J. SCHLEGEL.”


Margaret sent this letter round by the post. Next morning she received
the following reply by hand:


“DEAR MISS SCHLEGEL,

“You should not have written me such a letter. I called to tell you that
Paul has gone abroad.

“RUTH WILCOX.”


Margaret’s cheeks burnt. She could not finish her breakfast. She was on
fire with shame. Helen had told her that the youth was leaving England,
but other things had seemed more important, and she had forgotten. All
her absurd anxieties fell to the ground, and in their place arose the
certainty that she had been rude to Mrs. Wilcox. Rudeness affected
Margaret like a bitter taste in the mouth. It poisoned life. At times it
is necessary, but woe to those who employ it without due need. She flung
on a hat and shawl, just like a poor woman, and plunged into the fog,
which still continued. Her lips were compressed, the letter remained in
her hand, and in this state she crossed the street, entered the marble
vestibule of the flats, eluded the concierges, and ran up the stairs
till she reached the second floor. She sent in her name, and to her
surprise was shown straight into Mrs. Wilcox’s bedroom.

“Oh, Mrs. Wilcox, I have made the baddest blunder. I am more, more
ashamed and sorry than I can say.”

Mrs. Wilcox bowed gravely. She was offended, and did not pretend to the
contrary. She was sitting up in bed, writing letters on an invalid table
that spanned her knees. A breakfast tray was on another table beside
her. The light of the fire, the light from the window, and the light of
a candle-lamp, which threw a quivering halo round her hands combined to
create a strange atmosphere of dissolution.

“I knew he was going to India in November, but I forgot.”

“He sailed on the 17th for Nigeria, in Africa.”

“I knew--I know. I have been too absurd all through. I am very much
ashamed.”

Mrs. Wilcox did not answer.

“I am more sorry than I can say, and I hope that you will forgive me.”

“It doesn’t matter, Miss Schlegel. It is good of you to have come round
so promptly.”

“It does matter,” cried Margaret. “I have been rude to you; and my
sister is not even at home, so there was not even that excuse.”

“Indeed?”

“She has just gone to Germany.”

“She gone as well,” murmured the other. “Yes, certainly, it is quite
safe--safe, absolutely, now.”

“You’ve been worrying too!” exclaimed Margaret, getting more and
more excited, and taking a chair without invitation. “How perfectly
extraordinary! I can see that you have. You felt as I do; Helen mustn’t
meet him again.”

“I did think it best.”

“Now why?”

“That’s a most difficult question,” said Mrs. Wilcox, smiling, and a
little losing her expression of annoyance. “I think you put it best in
your letter--it was an instinct, which may be wrong.”

“It wasn’t that your son still--”

“Oh no; he often--my Paul is very young, you see.”

“Then what was it?”

She repeated: “An instinct which may be wrong.”

“In other words, they belong to types that can fall in love, but
couldn’t live together. That’s dreadfully probable. I’m afraid that in
nine cases out of ten Nature pulls one way and human nature another.”

“These are indeed ‘other words,’” said Mrs. Wilcox. “I had nothing so
coherent in my head. I was merely alarmed when I knew that my boy cared
for your sister.”

“Ah, I have always been wanting to ask you. How DID you know? Helen
was so surprised when our aunt drove up, and you stepped forward and
arranged things. Did Paul tell you?”

“There is nothing to be gained by discussing that,” said Mrs. Wilcox
after a moment’s pause.

“Mrs. Wilcox, were you very angry with us last June? I wrote you a
letter and you didn’t answer it.”

“I was certainly against taking Mrs. Matheson’s flat. I knew it was
opposite your house.”

“But it’s all right now?”

“I think so.”

“You only think? You aren’t sure? I do love these little muddles tidied
up?”

“Oh yes, I’m sure,” said Mrs. Wilcox, moving with uneasiness beneath
the clothes. “I always sound uncertain over things. It is my way of
speaking.”

“That’s all right, and I’m sure, too.”

Here the maid came in to remove the breakfast-tray. They were
interrupted, and when they resumed conversation it was on more normal
lines.

“I must say good-bye now--you will be getting up.”

“No--please stop a little longer--I am taking a day in bed. Now and then
I do.”

“I thought of you as one of the early risers.”

“At Howards End--yes; there is nothing to get up for in London.”

“Nothing to get up for?” cried the scandalised Margaret. “When there are
all the autumn exhibitions, and Ysaye playing in the afternoon! Not to
mention people.”

“The truth is, I am a little tired. First came the wedding, and then
Paul went off, and, instead of resting yesterday, I paid a round of
calls.”

“A wedding?”

“Yes; Charles, my elder son, is married.”

“Indeed!”

“We took the flat chiefly on that account, and also that Paul could get
his African outfit. The flat belongs to a cousin of my husband’s, and
she most kindly offered it to us. So before the day came we were able to
make the acquaintance of Dolly’s people, which we had not yet done.”

Margaret asked who Dolly’s people were.

“Fussell. The father is in the Indian army--retired; the brother is in
the army. The mother is dead.”

So perhaps these were the “chinless sunburnt men” whom Helen had espied
one afternoon through the window. Margaret felt mildly interested in
the fortunes of the Wilcox family. She had acquired the habit on Helen’s
account, and it still clung to her. She asked for more information
about Miss Dolly Fussell that was, and was given it in even, unemotional
tones. Mrs. Wilcox’s voice, though sweet and compelling, had little
range of expression. It suggested that pictures, concerts, and people
are all of small and equal value. Only once had it quickened--when
speaking of Howards End.

“Charles and Albert Fussell have known one another some time. They
belong to the same club, and are both devoted to golf. Dolly plays
golf too, though I believe not so well; and they first met in a mixed
foursome. We all like her, and are very much pleased. They were married
on the 11th, a few days before Paul sailed. Charles was very anxious to
have his brother as best man, so he made a great point of having it on
the 11th. The Fussells would have preferred it after Christmas, but they
were very nice about it. There is Dolly’s photograph--in that double
frame.”

“Are you quite certain that I’m not interrupting, Mrs. Wilcox?”

“Yes, quite.”

“Then I will stay. I’m enjoying this.”

Dolly’s photograph was now examined. It was signed “For dear Mims,”
 which Mrs. Wilcox interpreted as “the name she and Charles had settled
that she should call me.” Dolly looked silly, and had one of those
triangular faces that so often prove attractive to a robust man. She
was very pretty. From her Margaret passed to Charles, whose features
prevailed opposite. She speculated on the forces that had drawn the two
together till God parted them. She found time to hope that they would be
happy.

“They have gone to Naples for their honeymoon.”

“Lucky people!”

“I can hardly imagine Charles in Italy.”

“Doesn’t he care for travelling?”

“He likes travel, but he does see through foreigners so. What he enjoys
most is a motor tour in England, and I think that would have carried the
day if the weather had not been so abominable. His father gave him a car
for a wedding present, which for the present is being stored at Howards
End.”

“I suppose you have a garage there?”

“Yes. My husband built a little one only last month, to the west of the
house, not far from the wych-elm, in what used to be the paddock for the
pony.”

The last words had an indescribable ring about them.

“Where’s the pony gone?” asked Margaret after a pause.

“The pony? Oh, dead, ever so long ago.”

“The wych-elm I remember. Helen spoke of it as a very splendid tree.”

“It is the finest wych-elm in Hertfordshire. Did your sister tell you
about the teeth?”

“No.”

“Oh, it might interest you. There are pigs’ teeth stuck into the trunk,
about four feet from the ground. The country people put them in long
ago, and they think that if they chew a piece of the bark, it will cure
the toothache. The teeth are almost grown over now, and no one comes to
the tree.”

“I should. I love folklore and all festering superstitions.”

“Do you think that the tree really did cure toothache, if one believed
in it?”

“Of course it did. It would cure anything--once.”

“Certainly I remember cases--you see I lived at Howards End long, long
before Mr. Wilcox knew it. I was born there.”

The conversation again shifted. At the time it seemed little more than
aimless chatter. She was interested when her hostess explained that
Howards End was her own property. She was bored when too minute an
account was given of the Fussell family, of the anxieties of Charles
concerning Naples, of the movements of Mr. Wilcox and Evie, who were
motoring in Yorkshire. Margaret could not bear being bored. She grew
inattentive, played with the photograph frame, dropped it, smashed
Dolly’s glass, apologised, was pardoned, cut her finger thereon,
was pitied, and finally said she must be going--there was all the
housekeeping to do, and she had to interview Tibby’s riding-master.

Then the curious note was struck again.

“Good-bye, Miss Schlegel, good-bye. Thank you for coming. You have
cheered me up.”

“I’m so glad!”

“I--I wonder whether you ever think about yourself?”

“I think of nothing else,” said Margaret, blushing, but letting her hand
remain in that of the invalid.

“I wonder. I wondered at Heidelberg.”

“I’M sure!”

“I almost think--”

“Yes?” asked Margaret, for there was a long pause--a pause that was
somehow akin to the flicker of the fire, the quiver of the reading-lamp
upon their hands, the white blur from the window; a pause of shifting
and eternal shadows.

“I almost think you forget you’re a girl.”

Margaret was startled and a little annoyed. “I’m twenty-nine,” she
remarked. “That’s not so wildly girlish.”

Mrs. Wilcox smiled.

“What makes you say that? Do you mean that I have been gauche and rude?”

A shake of the head. “I only meant that I am fifty-one, and that to
me both of you--Read it all in some book or other; I cannot put things
clearly.”

“Oh, I’ve got it--inexperience. I’m no better than Helen, you mean, and
yet I presume to advise her.”

“Yes. You have got it. Inexperience is the word.”

“Inexperience,” repeated Margaret, in serious yet buoyant tones.

“Of course, I have everything to learn--absolutely everything--just
as much as Helen. Life’s very difficult and full of surprises. At all
events, I’ve got as far as that. To be humble and kind, to go
straight ahead, to love people rather than pity them, to remember the
submerged--well, one can’t do all these things at once, worse luck,
because they’re so contradictory. It’s then that proportion comes in--to
live by proportion. Don’t BEGIN with proportion. Only prigs do that.
Let proportion come in as a last resource, when the better things have
failed, and a deadlock--Gracious me, I’ve started preaching!”

“Indeed, you put the difficulties of life splendidly,” said Mrs. Wilcox,
withdrawing her hand into the deeper shadows. “It is just what I should
have liked to say about them myself.”



CHAPTER IX

Mrs. Wilcox cannot be accused of giving Margaret much information about
life. And Margaret, on the other hand, has made a fair show of modesty,
and has pretended to an inexperience that she certainly did not feel.
She had kept house for over ten years; she had entertained, almost with
distinction; she had brought up a charming sister, and was bringing up
a brother. Surely, if experience is attainable, she had attained it. Yet
the little luncheon-party that she gave in Mrs. Wilcox’s honour was not
a success. The new friend did not blend with the “one or two delightful
people” who had been asked to meet her, and the atmosphere was one of
polite bewilderment. Her tastes were simple, her knowledge of culture
slight, and she was not interested in the New English Art Club, nor in
the dividing-line between Journalism and Literature, which was started
as a conversational hare. The delightful people darted after it with
cries of joy, Margaret leading them, and not till the meal was half
over did they realise that the principal guest had taken no part in the
chase. There was no common topic. Mrs. Wilcox, whose life had been spent
in the service of husband and sons, had little to say to strangers who
had never shared it, and whose age was half her own. Clever talk alarmed
her, and withered her delicate imaginings; it was the social counterpart
of a motor-car, all jerks, and she was a wisp of hay, a flower. Twice
she deplored the weather, twice criticised the train service on the
Great Northern Railway. They vigorously assented, and rushed on, and
when she inquired whether there was any news of Helen, her hostess was
too much occupied in placing Rothenstein to answer. The question was
repeated: “I hope that your sister is safe in Germany by now.” Margaret
checked herself and said, “Yes, thank you; I heard on Tuesday.” But the
demon of vociferation was in her, and the next moment she was off again.

“Only on Tuesday, for they live right away at Stettin. Did you ever know
any one living at Stettin?”

“Never,” said Mrs. Wilcox gravely, while her neighbour, a young man low
down in the Education Office, began to discuss what people who lived
at Stettin ought to look like. Was there such a thing as Stettininity?
Margaret swept on.

“People at Stettin drop things into boats out of overhanging warehouses.
At least, our cousins do, but aren’t particularly rich. The town isn’t
interesting, except for a clock that rolls its eyes, and the view of the
Oder, which truly is something special. Oh, Mrs. Wilcox, you would
love the Oder! The river, or rather rivers--there seem to be dozens
of them--are intense blue, and the plain they run through an intensest
green.”

“Indeed! That sounds like a most beautiful view, Miss Schlegel.”

“So I say, but Helen, who will muddle things, says no, it’s like music.
The course of the Oder is to be like music. It’s obliged to remind her
of a symphonic poem. The part by the landing-stage is in B minor, if I
remember rightly, but lower down things get extremely mixed. There is a
slodgy theme in several keys at once, meaning mud-banks, and another for
the navigable canal, and the exit into the Baltic is in C sharp major,
pianissimo.”

“What do the overhanging warehouses make of that?” asked the man,
laughing.

“They make a great deal of it,” replied Margaret, unexpectedly rushing
off on a new track. “I think it’s affectation to compare the Oder to
music, and so do you, but the overhanging warehouses of Stettin take
beauty seriously, which we don’t, and the average Englishman doesn’t,
and despises all who do. Now don’t say ‘Germans have no taste,’ or I
shall scream. They haven’t. But--but--such a tremendous but!--they take
poetry seriously. They do take poetry seriously.”

“Is anything gained by that?”

“Yes, yes. The German is always on the lookout for beauty. He may miss
it through stupidity, or misinterpret it, but he is always asking
beauty to enter his life, and I believe that in the end it will come. At
Heidelberg I met a fat veterinary surgeon whose voice broke with sobs as
he repeated some mawkish poetry. So easy for me to laugh--I, who never
repeat poetry, good or bad, and cannot remember one fragment of verse
to thrill myself with. My blood boils--well, I’m half German, so put
it down to patriotism--when I listen to the tasteful contempt of the
average islander for things Teutonic, whether they’re Bocklin or my
veterinary surgeon. ‘Oh, Bocklin,’ they say; ‘he strains after beauty,
he peoples Nature with gods too consciously.’ Of course Bocklin strains,
because he wants something--beauty and all the other intangible gifts
that are floating about the world. So his landscapes don’t come off, and
Leader’s do.”

“I am not sure that I agree. Do you?” said he, turning to Mrs. Wilcox.

She replied: “I think Miss Schlegel puts everything splendidly;” and a
chill fell on the conversation.

“Oh, Mrs. Wilcox, say something nicer than that. It’s such a snub to be
told you put things splendidly.”

“I do not mean it as a snub. Your last speech interested me so much.
Generally people do not seem quite to like Germany. I have long wanted
to hear what is said on the other side.”

“The other side? Then you do disagree. Oh, good! Give us your side.”

“I have no side. But my husband”--her voice softened, the chill
increased--“has very little faith in the Continent, and our children
have all taken after him.”

“On what grounds? Do they feel that the Continent is in bad form?”

Mrs. Wilcox had no idea; she paid little attention to grounds. She was
not intellectual, nor even alert, and it was odd that, all the same, she
should give the idea of greatness. Margaret, zigzagging with her friends
over Thought and Art, was conscious of a personality that transcended
their own and dwarfed their activities. There was no bitterness in Mrs.
Wilcox; there was not even criticism; she was lovable, and no ungracious
or uncharitable word had passed her lips. Yet she and daily life were
out of focus; one or the other must show blurred. And at lunch she
seemed more out of focus than usual, and nearer the line that divides
daily life from a life that may be of greater importance.

“You will admit, though, that the Continent--it seems silly to speak of
‘the Continent,’ but really it is all more like itself than any part of
it is like England. England is unique. Do have another jelly first. I
was going to say that the Continent, for good or for evil, is interested
in ideas. Its Literature and Art have what one might call the kink of
the unseen about them, and this persists even through decadence and
affectation. There is more liberty of action in England, but for liberty
of thought go to bureaucratic Prussia. People will there discuss with
humility vital questions that we here think ourselves too good to touch
with tongs.”

“I do not want to go to Prussia,” said Mrs. Wilcox “not even to see
that interesting view that you were describing. And for discussing with
humility I am too old. We never discuss anything at Howards End.”

“Then you ought to!” said Margaret. “Discussion keeps a house alive. It
cannot stand by bricks and mortar alone.”

“It cannot stand without them,” said Mrs. Wilcox, unexpectedly catching
on to the thought, and rousing, for the first and last time, a faint
hope in the breasts of the delightful people. “It cannot stand without
them, and I sometimes think--But I cannot expect your generation to
agree, for even my daughter disagrees with me here.”

“Never mind us or her. Do say!”

“I sometimes think that it is wiser to leave action and discussion to
men.”

There was a little silence.

“One admits that the arguments against the suffrage ARE extraordinarily
strong,” said a girl opposite, leaning forward and crumbling her bread.

“Are they? I never follow any arguments. I am only too thankful not to
have a vote myself.”

“We didn’t mean the vote, though, did we?” supplied Margaret. “Aren’t
we differing on something much wider, Mrs. Wilcox? Whether women are to
remain what they have been since the dawn of history; or whether, since
men have moved forward so far, they too may move forward a little now. I
say they may. I would even admit a biological change.”

“I don’t know, I don’t know.”

“I must be getting back to my overhanging warehouse,” said the man.
“They’ve turned disgracefully strict.”

Mrs. Wilcox also rose.

“Oh, but come upstairs for a little. Miss Quested plays. Do you like
MacDowell? Do you mind his only having two noises? If you must really
go, I’ll see you out. Won’t you even have coffee?”

They left the dining-room closing the door behind them, and as Mrs.
Wilcox buttoned up her jacket, she said: “What an interesting life you
all lead in London!”

“No, we don’t,” said Margaret, with a sudden revulsion. “We lead the
lives of gibbering monkeys. Mrs. Wilcox--really--We have something quiet
and stable at the bottom. We really have. All my friends have. Don’t
pretend you enjoyed lunch, for you loathed it, but forgive me by coming
again, alone, or by asking me to you.”

“I am used to young people,” said Mrs. Wilcox, and with each word she
spoke the outlines of known things grew dim. “I hear a great deal of
chatter at home, for we, like you, entertain a great deal. With us it
is more sport and politics, but--I enjoyed my lunch very much, Miss
Schlegel, dear, and am not pretending, and only wish I could have joined
in more. For one thing, I’m not particularly well just to-day. For
another, you younger people move so quickly that it dazes me. Charles
is the same, Dolly the same. But we are all in the same boat, old and
young. I never forget that.”

They were silent for a moment. Then, with a newborn emotion, they shook
hands. The conversation ceased suddenly when Margaret re-entered the
dining-room; her friends had been talking over her new friend, and had
dismissed her as uninteresting.



CHAPTER X

Several days passed.

Was Mrs. Wilcox one of the unsatisfactory people--there are many of
them--who dangle intimacy and then withdraw it? They evoke our interests
and affections, and keep the life of the spirit dawdling round them.
Then they withdraw. When physical passion is involved, there is a
definite name for such behaviour--flirting--and if carried far enough
it is punishable by law. But no law--not public opinion even--punishes
those who coquette with friendship, though the dull ache that they
inflict, the sense of misdirected effort and exhaustion, may be as
intolerable. Was she one of these?

Margaret feared so at first, for, with a Londoner’s impatience, she
wanted everything to be settled up immediately. She mistrusted the
periods of quiet that are essential to true growth. Desiring to book
Mrs. Wilcox as a friend, she pressed on the ceremony, pencil, as it
were, in hand, pressing the more because the rest of the family were
away, and the opportunity seemed favourable. But the elder woman would
not be hurried. She refused to fit in with the Wickham Place set, or to
reopen discussion of Helen and Paul, whom Margaret would have utilised
as a short-cut. She took her time, or perhaps let time take her, and
when the crisis did come all was ready.

The crisis opened with a message: Would Miss Schlegel come shopping?
Christmas was nearing, and Mrs. Wilcox felt behindhand with the
presents. She had taken some more days in bed, and must make up for lost
time. Margaret accepted, and at eleven o’clock one cheerless morning
they started out in a brougham.

“First of all,” began Margaret, “we must make a list and tick off the
people’s names. My aunt always does, and this fog may thicken up any
moment. Have you any ideas?”

“I thought we would go to Harrods or the Haymarket Stores,” said Mrs.
Wilcox rather hopelessly. “Everything is sure to be there. I am not a
good shopper. The din is so confusing, and your aunt is quite right--one
ought to make a list. Take my notebook, then, and write your own name at
the top of the page.”

“Oh, hooray!” said Margaret, writing it. “How very kind of you to start
with me!” But she did not want to receive anything expensive. Their
acquaintance was singular rather than intimate, and she divined that the
Wilcox clan would resent any expenditure on outsiders; the more compact
families do. She did not want to be thought a second Helen, who would
snatch presents since she could not snatch young men, nor to be exposed
like a second Aunt Juley, to the insults of Charles. A certain austerity
of demeanour was best, and she added: “I don’t really want a Yuletide
gift, though. In fact, I’d rather not.”

“Why?”

“Because I’ve odd ideas about Christmas. Because I have all that money
can buy. I want more people, but no more things.”

“I should like to give you something worth your acquaintance, Miss
Schlegel, in memory of your kindness to me during my lonely fortnight.
It has so happened that I have been left alone, and you have stopped me
from brooding. I am too apt to brood.”

“If that is so,” said Margaret, “if I have happened to be of use to you,
which I didn’t know, you cannot pay me back with anything tangible.”

“I suppose not, but one would like to. Perhaps I shall think of
something as we go about.”

Her name remained at the head of the list, but nothing was written
opposite it. They drove from shop to shop. The air was white, and when
they alighted it tasted like cold pennies. At times they passed through
a clot of grey. Mrs. Wilcox’s vitality was low that morning, and it was
Margaret who decided on a horse for this little girl, a golliwog for
that, for the rector’s wife a copper warming-tray. “We always give the
servants money.” “Yes, do you, yes, much easier,” replied Margaret but
felt the grotesque impact of the unseen upon the seen, and saw issuing
from a forgotten manger at Bethlehem this torrent of coins and toys.
Vulgarity reigned. Public-houses, besides their usual exhortation
against temperance reform, invited men to “Join our Christmas goose
club”--one bottle of gin, etc., or two, according to subscription. A
poster of a woman in tights heralded the Christmas pantomime, and little
red devils, who had come in again that year, were prevalent upon the
Christmas-cards. Margaret was no morbid idealist. She did not wish
this spate of business and self-advertisement checked. It was only the
occasion of it that struck her with amazement annually. How many of
these vacillating shoppers and tired shop-assistants realised that it
was a divine event that drew them together? She realised it, though
standing outside in the matter. She was not a Christian in the accepted
sense; she did not believe that God had ever worked among us as a young
artisan. These people, or most of them, believed it, and if pressed,
would affirm it in words. But the visible signs of their belief were
Regent Street or Drury Lane, a little mud displaced, a little money
spent, a little food cooked, eaten, and forgotten. Inadequate. But in
public who shall express the unseen adequately? It is private life that
holds out the mirror to infinity; personal intercourse, and that alone,
that ever hints at a personality beyond our daily vision.

“No, I do like Christmas on the whole,” she announced. “In its clumsy
way, it does approach Peace and Goodwill. But oh, it is clumsier every
year.”

“Is it? I am only used to country Christmases.”

“We are usually in London, and play the game with vigour--carols at
the Abbey, clumsy midday meal, clumsy dinner for the maids, followed by
Christmas-tree and dancing of poor children, with songs from Helen.
The drawing-room does very well for that. We put the tree in the
powder-closet, and draw a curtain when the candles are lighted, and with
the looking-glass behind it looks quite pretty. I wish we might have
a powder-closet in our next house. Of course, the tree has to be very
small, and the presents don’t hang on it. No; the presents reside in a
sort of rocky landscape made of crumpled brown paper.”

“You spoke of your ‘next house,’ Miss Schlegel. Then are you leaving
Wickham Place?”

“Yes, in two or three years, when the lease expires. We must.”

“Have you been there long?”

“All our lives.”

“You will be very sorry to leave it.”

“I suppose so. We scarcely realise it yet. My father--” She broke off,
for they had reached the stationery department of the Haymarket Stores,
and Mrs. Wilcox wanted to order some private greeting cards.

“If possible, something distinctive,” she sighed. At the counter
she found a friend, bent on the same errand, and conversed with
her insipidly, wasting much time. “My husband and our daughter are
motoring.” “Bertha, too? Oh, fancy, what a coincidence!”

Margaret, though not practical, could shine in such company as this.
While they talked, she went through a volume of specimen cards,
and submitted one for Mrs. Wilcox’s inspection. Mrs. Wilcox was
delighted--so original, words so sweet; she would order a hundred
like that, and could never be sufficiently grateful. Then, just as the
assistant was booking the order, she said: “Do you know, I’ll wait. On
second thoughts, I’ll wait. There’s plenty of time still, isn’t there,
and I shall be able to get Evie’s opinion.”

They returned to the carriage by devious paths; when they were in, she
said, “But couldn’t you get it renewed?”

“I beg your pardon?” asked Margaret.

“The lease, I mean.”

“Oh, the lease! Have you been thinking of that all the time? How very
kind of you!”

“Surely something could be done.”

“No; values have risen too enormously. They mean to pull down Wickham
Place, and build flats like yours.”

“But how horrible!”

“Landlords are horrible.”

Then she said vehemently: “It is monstrous, Miss Schlegel; it isn’t
right. I had no idea that this was hanging over you. I do pity you from
the bottom of my heart. To be parted from your house, your father’s
house--it oughtn’t to be allowed. It is worse than dying. I would rather
die than--Oh, poor girls! Can what they call civilisation be right, if
people mayn’t die in the room where they were born? My dear, I am so
sorry.”

Margaret did not know what to say. Mrs. Wilcox had been overtired by the
shopping, and was inclined to hysteria.

“Howards End was nearly pulled down once. It would have killed me.”

“I--Howards End must be a very different house to ours. We are fond of
ours, but there is nothing distinctive about it. As you saw, it is an
ordinary London house. We shall easily find another.”

“So you think.”

“Again my lack of experience, I suppose!” said Margaret, easing away
from the subject. “I can’t say anything when you take up that line, Mrs.
Wilcox. I wish I could see myself as you see me--foreshortened into a
backfisch. Quite the ingenue. Very charming--wonderfully well read for
my age, but incapable--”

Mrs. Wilcox would not be deterred. “Come down with me to Howards End
now,” she said, more vehemently than ever. “I want you to see it. You
have never seen it. I want to hear what you say about it, for you do put
things so wonderfully.”

Margaret glanced at the pitiless air and then at the tired face of her
companion. “Later on I should love it,” she continued, “but it’s hardly
the weather for such an expedition, and we ought to start when we’re
fresh. Isn’t the house shut up, too?”

She received no answer. Mrs. Wilcox appeared to be annoyed.

“Might I come some other day?”

Mrs. Wilcox bent forward and tapped the glass. “Back to Wickham Place,
please!” was her order to the coachman. Margaret had been snubbed.

“A thousand thanks, Miss Schlegel, for all your help.”

“Not at all.”

“It is such a comfort to get the presents off my mind--the
Christmas-cards especially. I do admire your choice.”

It was her turn to receive no answer. In her turn Margaret became
annoyed.

“My husband and Evie will be back the day after to-morrow. That is why
I dragged you out shopping to-day. I stayed in town chiefly to shop,
but got through nothing, and now he writes that they must cut their
tour short, the weather is so bad, and the police-traps have been so
bad--nearly as bad as in Surrey. Ours is such a careful chauffeur, and
my husband feels it particularly hard that they should be treated like
road-hogs.”

“Why?”

“Well, naturally he--he isn’t a road-hog.”

“He was exceeding the speed-limit, I conclude. He must expect to suffer
with the lower animals.”

Mrs. Wilcox was silenced. In growing discomfort they drove homewards.
The city seemed Satanic, the narrower streets oppressing like the
galleries of a mine.

No harm was done by the fog to trade, for it lay high, and the lighted
windows of the shops were thronged with customers. It was rather a
darkening of the spirit which fell back upon itself, to find a more
grievous darkness within. Margaret nearly spoke a dozen times, but
something throttled her. She felt petty and awkward, and her meditations
on Christmas grew more cynical. Peace? It may bring other gifts, but is
there a single Londoner to whom Christmas is peaceful? The craving for
excitement and for elaboration has ruined that blessing. Goodwill? Had
she seen any example of it in the hordes of purchasers? Or in herself?
She had failed to respond to this invitation merely because it was a
little queer and imaginative--she, whose birthright it was to nourish
imagination! Better to have accepted, to have tired themselves a little
by the journey, than coldly to reply, “Might I come some other day?” Her
cynicism left her. There would be no other day. This shadowy woman would
never ask her again.

They parted at the Mansions. Mrs. Wilcox went in after due civilities,
and Margaret watched the tall, lonely figure sweep up the hall to
the lift. As the glass doors closed on it she had the sense of an
imprisonment The beautiful head disappeared first, still buried in the
muff; the long trailing skirt followed. A woman of undefinable rarity
was going up heavenward, like a specimen in a bottle. And into what a
heaven--a vault as of hell, sooty black, from which soot descended!

At lunch her brother, seeing her inclined for silence insisted on
talking. Tibby was not ill-natured, but from babyhood something drove
him to do the unwelcome and the unexpected. Now he gave her a long
account of the day-school that he sometimes patronised. The account was
interesting, and she had often pressed him for it before, but she
could not attend now, for her mind was focussed on the invisible. She
discerned that Mrs. Wilcox, though a loving wife and mother, had only
one passion in life--her house--and that the moment was solemn when she
invited a friend to share this passion with her. To answer “another day”
 was to answer as a fool. “Another day” will do for brick and mortar, but
not for the Holy of Holies into which Howards End had been transfigured.
Her own curiosity was slight. She had heard more than enough about it in
the summer. The nine windows, the vine, and the wych-elm had no pleasant
connections for her, and she would have preferred to spend the afternoon
at a concert. But imagination triumphed. While her brother held forth
she determined to go, at whatever cost, and to compel Mrs. Wilcox to go,
too. When lunch was over she stepped over to the flats.

Mrs. Wilcox had just gone away for the night.

Margaret said that it was of no consequence, hurried downstairs, and
took a hansom to King’s Cross. She was convinced that the escapade
was important, though it would have puzzled her to say why. There was
question of imprisonment and escape, and though she did not know the
time of the train, she strained her eyes for St. Pancras’s clock.

Then the clock of King’s Cross swung into sight, a second moon in that
infernal sky, and her cab drew up at the station. There was a train for
Hilton in five minutes. She took a ticket, asking in her agitation for
a single. As she did so, a grave and happy voice saluted her and thanked
her.

“I will come if I still may,” said Margaret, laughing nervously.

“You are coming to sleep, dear, too. It is in the morning that my house
is most beautiful. You are coming to stop. I cannot show you my meadow
properly except at sunrise. These fogs”--she pointed at the station
roof--“never spread far. I dare say they are sitting in the sun in
Hertfordshire, and you will never repent joining them.”

“I shall never repent joining you.”

“It is the same.”

They began the walk up the long platform. Far at its end stood the
train, breasting the darkness without. They never reached it. Before
imagination could triumph, there were cries of “Mother! mother!” and a
heavy-browed girl darted out of the cloak-room and seized Mrs. Wilcox by
the arm.

“Evie!” she gasped--“Evie, my pet--”

The girl called, “Father! I say! look who’s here.”

“Evie, dearest girl, why aren’t you in Yorkshire?”

“No--motor smash--changed plans--father’s coming.”

“Why, Ruth!” cried Mr. Wilcox, joining them, “what in the name of all
that’s wonderful are you doing here, Ruth?”

Mrs. Wilcox had recovered herself.

“Oh, Henry dear!--here’s a lovely surprise--but let me introduce--but I
think you know Miss Schlegel.”

“Oh yes,” he replied, not greatly interested. “But how’s yourself,
Ruth?”

“Fit as a fiddle,” she answered gaily.

“So are we, and so was our car, which ran A1 as far as Ripon, but there
a wretched horse and cart which a fool of a driver--”

“Miss Schlegel, our little outing must be for another day.”

“I was saying that this fool of a driver, as the policeman himself
admits.”

“Another day, Mrs. Wilcox. Of course.”

“--But as we’ve insured against third party risks, it won’t so much
matter--”

“--Cart and car being practically at right angles--”

The voices of the happy family rose high. Margaret was left alone.
No one wanted her. Mrs. Wilcox walked out of King’s Cross between her
husband and her daughter, listening to both of them.



CHAPTER XI

The funeral was over. The carriages had rolled away through the soft
mud, and only the poor remained. They approached to the newly-dug shaft
and looked their last at the coffin, now almost hidden beneath the
spadefuls of clay. It was their moment. Most of them were women from the
dead woman’s district, to whom black garments had been served out by Mr.
Wilcox’s orders. Pure curiosity had brought others. They thrilled with
the excitement of a death, and of a rapid death, and stood in groups or
moved between the graves, like drops of ink. The son of one of them, a
wood-cutter, was perched high above their heads, pollarding one of the
churchyard elms. From where he sat he could see the village of Hilton,
strung upon the North Road, with its accreting suburbs; the sunset
beyond, scarlet and orange, winking at him beneath brows of grey; the
church; the plantations; and behind him an unspoilt country of fields
and farms. But he, too, was rolling the event luxuriously in his mouth.
He tried to tell his mother down below all that he had felt when he saw
the coffin approaching: how he could not leave his work, and yet did not
like to go on with it; how he had almost slipped out of the tree, he was
so upset; the rooks had cawed, and no wonder--it was as if rooks knew
too. His mother claimed the prophetic power herself--she had seen
a strange look about Mrs. Wilcox for some time. London had done the
mischief, said others. She had been a kind lady; her grandmother had
been kind, too--a plainer person, but very kind. Ah, the old sort was
dying out! Mr. Wilcox, he was a kind gentleman. They advanced to the
topic again and again, dully, but with exaltation. The funeral of a rich
person was to them what the funeral of Alcestis or Ophelia is to the
educated. It was Art; though remote from life, it enhanced life’s
values, and they witnessed it avidly.

The grave-diggers, who had kept up an undercurrent of disapproval--they
disliked Charles; it was not a moment to speak of such things, but they
did not like Charles Wilcox--the grave-diggers finished their work and
piled up the wreaths and crosses above it. The sun set over Hilton;
the grey brows of the evening flushed a little, and were cleft with
one scarlet frown. Chattering sadly to each other, the mourners passed
through the lych-gate and traversed the chestnut avenues that led down
to the village. The young wood-cutter stayed a little longer, poised
above the silence and swaying rhythmically. At last the bough fell
beneath his saw. With a grunt, he descended, his thoughts dwelling no
longer on death, but on love, for he was mating. He stopped as he passed
the new grave; a sheaf of tawny chrysanthemums had caught his eye.
“They didn’t ought to have coloured flowers at buryings,” he reflected.
Trudging on a few steps, he stopped again, looked furtively at the dusk,
turned back, wrenched a chrysanthemum from the sheaf, and hid it in his
pocket.

After him came silence absolute. The cottage that abutted on the
churchyard was empty, and no other house stood near. Hour after hour
the scene of the interment remained without an eye to witness it. Clouds
drifted over it from the west; or the church may have been a ship,
high-prowed, steering with all its company towards infinity. Towards
morning the air grew colder, the sky clearer, the surface of the earth
hard and sparkling above the prostrate dead. The wood-cutter, returning
after a night of joy, reflected: “They lilies, they chrysants; it’s a
pity I didn’t take them all.”

Up at Howards End they were attempting breakfast. Charles and Evie sat
in the dining-room, with Mrs. Charles. Their father, who could not bear
to see a face, breakfasted upstairs. He suffered acutely. Pain came over
him in spasms, as if it was physical, and even while he was about to
eat, his eyes would fill with tears, and he would lay down the morsel
untasted.

He remembered his wife’s even goodness during thirty years. Not anything
in detail--not courtship or early raptures--but just the unvarying
virtue, that seemed to him a woman’s noblest quality. So many women are
capricious, breaking into odd flaws of passion or frivolity. Not so his
wife. Year after year, summer and winter, as bride and mother, she had
been the same, he had always trusted her. Her tenderness! Her innocence!
The wonderful innocence that was hers by the gift of God. Ruth knew
no more of worldly wickedness and wisdom than did the flowers in her
garden, or the grass in her field. Her idea of business--“Henry, why
do people who have enough money try to get more money?” Her idea of
politics--“I am sure that if the mothers of various nations could meet,
there would be no more wars,” Her idea of religion--ah, this had been a
cloud, but a cloud that passed. She came of Quaker stock, and he and his
family, formerly Dissenters, were now members of the Church of England.
The rector’s sermons had at first repelled her, and she had expressed a
desire for “a more inward light,” adding, “not so much for myself as for
baby” (Charles). Inward light must have been granted, for he heard no
complaints in later years. They brought up their three children without
dispute. They had never disputed.

She lay under the earth now. She had gone, and as if to make her going
the more bitter, had gone with a touch of mystery that was all unlike
her. “Why didn’t you tell me you knew of it?” he had moaned, and her
faint voice had answered: “I didn’t want to, Henry--I might have been
wrong--and every one hates illnesses.” He had been told of the horror by
a strange doctor, whom she had consulted during his absence from town.
Was this altogether just? Without fully explaining, she had died. It
was a fault on her part, and--tears rushed into his eyes--what a little
fault! It was the only time she had deceived him in those thirty years.

He rose to his feet and looked out of the window, for Evie had come in
with the letters, and he could meet no one’s eye. Ah yes--she had been a
good woman--she had been steady. He chose the word deliberately. To him
steadiness included all praise. He himself, gazing at the wintry garden,
is in appearance a steady man. His face was not as square as his son’s,
and, indeed, the chin, though firm enough in outline, retreated a
little, and the lips, ambiguous, were curtained by a moustache. But
there was no external hint of weakness. The eyes, if capable of kindness
and good-fellowship, if ruddy for the moment with tears, were the eyes
of one who could not be driven. The forehead, too, was like Charles’s.
High and straight, brown and polished, merging abruptly into temples and
skull, it had the effect of a bastion that protected his head from the
world. At times it had the effect of a blank wall. He had dwelt behind
it, intact and happy, for fifty years. “The post’s come, father,” said
Evie awkwardly.

“Thanks. Put it down.”

“Has the breakfast been all right?”

“Yes, thanks.”

The girl glanced at him and at it with constraint. She did not know what
to do.

“Charles says do you want the Times?”

“No, I’ll read it later.”

“Ring if you want anything, father, won’t you?”

“I’ve all I want.”

Having sorted the letters from the circulars, she went back to the
dining-room.

“Father’s eaten nothing,” she announced, sitting down with wrinkled
brows behind the tea-urn.

Charles did not answer, but after a moment he ran quickly upstairs,
opened the door, and said “Look here father, you must eat, you know;”
 and having paused for a reply that did not come, stole down again. “He’s
going to read his letters first, I think,” he said evasively; “I dare
say he will go on with his breakfast afterwards.” Then he took up the
Times, and for some time there was no sound except the clink of cup
against saucer and of knife on plate.

Poor Mrs. Charles sat between her silent companions terrified at
the course of events, and a little bored. She was a rubbishy little
creature, and she knew it. A telegram had dragged her from Naples to
the death-bed of a woman whom she had scarcely known. A word from her
husband had plunged her into mourning. She desired to mourn inwardly as
well, but she wished that Mrs. Wilcox, since fated to die, could have
died before the marriage, for then less would have been expected of her.
Crumbling her toast, and too nervous to ask for the butter, she remained
almost motionless, thankful only for this, that her father-in-law was
having his breakfast upstairs.

At last Charles spoke. “They had no business to be pollarding those elms
yesterday,” he said to his sister.

“No, indeed.”

“I must make a note of that,” he continued. “I am surprised that the
rector allowed it.”

“Perhaps it may not be the rector’s affair.”

“Whose else could it be?”

“The lord of the manor.”

“Impossible.”

“Butter, Dolly?”

“Thank you, Evie dear. Charles--”

“Yes, dear?”

“I didn’t know one could pollard elms. I thought one only pollarded
willows.”

“Oh no, one can pollard elms.”

“Then why oughtn’t the elms in the churchyard to be pollarded?” Charles
frowned a little, and turned again to his sister.

“Another point. I must speak to Chalkeley.”

“Yes, rather; you must complain to Chalkeley.”

“It’s no good his saying he is not responsible for those men. He is
responsible.”

“Yes, rather.”

Brother and sister were not callous. They spoke thus, partly because
they desired to keep Chalkeley up to the mark--a healthy desire in its
way--partly because they avoided the personal note in life. All Wilcoxes
did. It did not seem to them of supreme importance. Or it may be as
Helen supposed: they realised its importance, but were afraid of it.
Panic and emptiness, could one glance behind. They were not callous, and
they left the breakfast-table with aching hearts. Their mother never had
come in to breakfast. It was in the other rooms, and especially in the
garden, that they felt her loss most. As Charles went out to the garage,
he was reminded at every step of the woman who had loved him and whom
he could never replace. What battles he had fought against her gentle
conservatism! How she had disliked improvements, yet how loyally she had
accepted them when made! He and his father--what trouble they had had
to get this very garage! With what difficulty had they persuaded her to
yield them the paddock for it--the paddock that she loved more dearly
than the garden itself! The vine--she had got her way about the vine. It
still encumbered the south wall with its unproductive branches. And so
with Evie, as she stood talking to the cook. Though she could take up
her mother’s work inside the house, just as the man could take it up
without, she felt that something unique had fallen out of her life.
Their grief, though less poignant than their father’s, grew from deeper
roots, for a wife may be replaced; a mother never. Charles would go
back to the office. There was little at Howards End. The contents of his
mother’s will had long been known to them. There were no legacies, no
annuities, none of the posthumous bustle with which some of the dead
prolong their activities. Trusting her husband, she had left him
everything without reserve. She was quite a poor woman--the house had
been all her dowry, and the house would come to Charles in time. Her
watercolours Mr. Wilcox intended to reserve for Paul, while Evie would
take the jewellery and lace. How easily she slipped out of life!
Charles thought the habit laudable, though he did not intend to adopt
it himself, whereas Margaret would have seen in it an almost culpable
indifference to earthly fame. Cynicism--not the superficial cynicism
that snarls and sneers, but the cynicism that can go with courtesy and
tenderness--that was the note of Mrs. Wilcox’s will. She wanted not to
vex people. That accomplished, the earth might freeze over her for ever.

No, there was nothing for Charles to wait for. He could not go on
with his honeymoon, so he would go up to London and work--he felt too
miserable hanging about. He and Dolly would have the furnished flat
while his father rested quietly in the country with Evie. He could
also keep an eye on his own little house, which was being painted and
decorated for him in one of the Surrey suburbs, and in which he hoped to
install himself soon after Christmas. Yes, he would go up after lunch in
his new motor, and the town servants, who had come down for the funeral,
would go up by train.

He found his father’s chauffeur in the garage, said “Morning” without
looking at the man’s face, and bending over the car, continued: “Hullo!
my new car’s been driven!”

“Has it, sir?”

“Yes,” said Charles, getting rather red; “and whoever’s driven it hasn’t
cleaned it properly, for there’s mud on the axle. Take it off.”

The man went for the cloths without a word. He was a chauffeur as ugly
as sin--not that this did him disservice with Charles, who thought charm
in a man rather rot, and had soon got rid of the little Italian beast
with whom they had started.

“Charles--” His bride was tripping after him over the hoar-frost, a
dainty black column, her little face and elaborate mourning hat forming
the capital thereof.

“One minute, I’m busy. Well, Crane, who’s been driving it, do you
suppose?”

“Don’t know, I’m sure, sir. No one’s driven it since I’ve been back,
but, of course, there’s the fortnight I’ve been away with the other car
in Yorkshire.”

The mud came off easily.

“Charles, your father’s down. Something’s happened. He wants you in the
house at once. Oh, Charles!”

“Wait, dear, wait a minute. Who had the key of the garage while you were
away, Crane?”

“The gardener, sir.”

“Do you mean to tell me that old Penny can drive a motor?”

“No, sir; no one’s had the motor out, sir.”

“Then how do you account for the mud on the axle?”

“I can’t, of course, say for the time I’ve been in Yorkshire. No more
mud now, sir.”

Charles was vexed. The man was treating him as a fool, and if his heart
had not been so heavy he would have reported him to his father. But it
was not a morning for complaints. Ordering the motor to be round after
lunch, he joined his wife, who had all the while been pouring out some
incoherent story about a letter and a Miss Schlegel.

“Now, Dolly, I can attend to you. Miss Schlegel? What does she want?”

When people wrote a letter Charles always asked what they wanted. Want
was to him the only cause of action. And the question in this case was
correct, for his wife replied, “She wants Howards End.”

“Howards End? Now, Crane, just don’t forget to put on the Stepney
wheel.”

“No, sir.”

“Now, mind you don’t forget, for I--Come, little woman.” When they were
out of the chauffeur’s sight he put his arm round her waist and pressed
her against him. All his affection and half his attention--it was what
he granted her throughout their happy married life.

“But you haven’t listened, Charles.”

“What’s wrong?”

“I keep on telling you--Howards End. Miss Schlegel’s got it.”

“Got what?” said Charles, unclasping her. “What the dickens are you
talking about?”

“Now, Charles, you promised not to say those naughty--”

“Look here, I’m in no mood for foolery. It’s no morning for it either.”

“I tell you--I keep on telling you--Miss Schlegel--she’s got it--your
mother’s left it to her--and you’ve all got to move out!”

“HOWARDS END?”

“HOWARDS END!” she screamed, mimicking him, and as she did so Evie came
dashing out of the shubbery.

“Dolly, go back at once! My father’s much annoyed with you.
Charles”--she hit herself wildly--“come in at once to father. He’s had a
letter that’s too awful.”

Charles began to run, but checked himself, and stepped heavily across
the gravel path. There the house was with the nine windows, the
unprolific vine. He exclaimed, “Schlegels again!” and as if to complete
chaos, Dolly said, “Oh no, the matron of the nursing home has written
instead of her.”

“Come in, all three of you!” cried his father, no longer inert.

“Dolly, why have you disobeyed me?”

“Oh, Mr. Wilcox--”

“I told you not to go out to the garage. I’ve heard you all shouting in
the garden. I won’t have it. Come in.”

He stood in the porch, transformed, letters in his hand.

“Into the dining-room, every one of you. We can’t discuss private
matters in the middle of all the servants. Here, Charles, here; read
these. See what you make.”

Charles took two letters, and read them as he followed the procession.
The first was a covering note from the matron. Mrs. Wilcox had desired
her, when the funeral should be over, to forward the enclosed. The
enclosed--it was from his mother herself. She had written: “To my
husband: I should like Miss Schlegel (Margaret) to have Howards End.”

“I suppose we’re going to have a talk about this?” he remarked,
ominously calm.

“Certainly. I was coming out to you when Dolly--”

“Well, let’s sit down.”

“Come, Evie, don’t waste time, sit--down.”

In silence they drew up to the breakfast-table. The events of
yesterday--indeed, of this morning suddenly receded into a past so
remote that they seemed scarcely to have lived in it. Heavy breathings
were heard. They were calming themselves. Charles, to steady
them further, read the enclosure out loud: “A note in my mother’s
handwriting, in an envelope addressed to my father, sealed. Inside: ‘I
should like Miss Schlegel (Margaret) to have Howards End.’ No date, no
signature. Forwarded through the matron of that nursing home. Now, the
question is--”

Dolly interrupted him. “But I say that note isn’t legal. Houses ought to
be done by a lawyer, Charles, surely.”

Her husband worked his jaw severely. Little lumps appeared in front of
either ear--a symptom that she had not yet learnt to respect, and she
asked whether she might see the note. Charles looked at his father for
permission, who said abstractedly, “Give it her.” She seized it, and
at once exclaimed: “Why, it’s only in pencil! I said so. Pencil never
counts.”

“We know that it is not legally binding, Dolly,” said Mr. Wilcox,
speaking from out of his fortress. “We are aware of that. Legally, I
should be justified in tearing it up and throwing it into the fire. Of
course, my dear, we consider you as one of the family, but it will be
better if you do not interfere with what you do not understand.”

Charles, vexed both with his father and his wife, then repeated: “The
question is--” He had cleared a space of the breakfast-table from plates
and knives, so that he could draw patterns on the tablecloth. “The
question is whether Miss Schlegel, during the fortnight we were all
away, whether she unduly--” He stopped.

“I don’t think that,” said his father, whose nature was nobler than his
son’s.

“Don’t think what?”

“That she would have--that it is a case of undue influence. No, to
my mind the question is the--the invalid’s condition at the time she
wrote.”

“My dear father, consult an expert if you like, but I don’t admit it is
my mother’s writing.”

“Why, you just said it was!” cried Dolly.

“Never mind if I did,” he blazed out; “and hold your tongue.”

The poor little wife coloured at this, and, drawing her handkerchief
from her pocket, shed a few tears. No one noticed her. Evie was scowling
like an angry boy. The two men were gradually assuming the manner of the
committee-room. They were both at their best when serving on committees.
They did not make the mistake of handling human affairs in the bulk, but
disposed of them item by item, sharply. Caligraphy was the item before
them now, and on it they turned their well-trained brains. Charles,
after a little demur, accepted the writing as genuine, and they passed
on to the next point. It is the best--perhaps the only--way of dodging
emotion. They were the average human article, and had they considered
the note as a whole it would have driven them miserable or mad.
Considered item by item, the emotional content was minimised, and all
went forward smoothly. The clock ticked, the coals blazed higher, and
contended with the white radiance that poured in through the windows.
Unnoticed, the sun occupied his sky, and the shadows of the tree stems,
extraordinarily solid, fell like trenches of purple across the frosted
lawn. It was a glorious winter morning. Evie’s fox terrier, who had
passed for white, was only a dirty grey dog now, so intense was the
purity that surrounded him. He was discredited, but the blackbirds that
he was chasing glowed with Arabian darkness, for all the conventional
colouring of life had been altered. Inside, the clock struck ten with a
rich and confident note. Other clocks confirmed it, and the discussion
moved towards its close.

To follow it is unnecessary. It is rather a moment when the commentator
should step forward. Ought the Wilcoxes to have offered their home to
Margaret? I think not. The appeal was too flimsy. It was not legal; it
had been written in illness, and under the spell of a sudden friendship;
it was contrary to the dead woman’s intentions in the past, contrary to
her very nature, so far as that nature was understood by them. To them
Howards End was a house: they could not know that to her it had been
a spirit, for which she sought a spiritual heir. And--pushing one step
farther in these mists--may they not have decided even better than
they supposed? Is it credible that the possessions of the spirit can be
bequeathed at all? Has the soul offspring? A wych-elm tree, a vine, a
wisp of hay with dew on it--can passion for such things be transmitted
where there is no bond of blood? No; the Wilcoxes are not to be blamed.
The problem is too terrific, and they could not even perceive a problem.
No; it is natural and fitting that after due debate they should tear
the note up and throw it on to their dining-room fire. The practical
moralist may acquit them absolutely. He who strives to look deeper
may acquit them--almost. For one hard fact remains. They did neglect a
personal appeal. The woman who had died did say to them, “Do this,” and
they answered, “We will not.”

The incident made a most painful impression on them. Grief mounted into
the brain and worked there disquietingly. Yesterday they had lamented:
“She was a dear mother, a true wife; in our absence she neglected her
health and died.” To-day they thought: “She was not as true, as dear, as
we supposed.” The desire for a more inward light had found expression at
last, the unseen had impacted on the seen, and all that they could say
was “Treachery.” Mrs. Wilcox had been treacherous to the family, to the
laws of property, to her own written word. How did she expect Howards
End to be conveyed to Miss Schlegel? Was her husband, to whom it legally
belonged, to make it over to her as a free gift? Was the said Miss
Schlegel to have a life interest in it, or to own it absolutely? Was
there to be no compensation for the garage and other improvements that
they had made under the assumption that all would be theirs some
day? Treacherous! treacherous and absurd! When we think the dead both
treacherous and absurd, we have gone far towards reconciling ourselves
to their departure. That note, scribbled in pencil, sent through the
matron, was unbusinesslike as well as cruel, and decreased at once the
value of the woman who had written it.

“Ah, well!” said Mr. Wilcox, rising from the table. “I shouldn’t have
thought it possible.”

“Mother couldn’t have meant it,” said Evie, still frowning.

“No, my girl, of course not.”

“Mother believed so in ancestors too--it isn’t like her to leave
anything to an outsider, who’d never appreciate.”

“The whole thing is unlike her,” he announced. “If Miss Schlegel had
been poor, if she had wanted a house, I could understand it a little.
But she has a house of her own. Why should she want another? She
wouldn’t have any use for Howards End.”

“That time may prove,” murmured Charles.

“How?” asked his sister.

“Presumably she knows--mother will have told her. She got twice or three
times into the nursing home. Presumably she is awaiting developments.”

“What a horrid woman!” And Dolly, who had recovered, cried, “Why, she
may be coming down to turn us out now!”

Charles put her right. “I wish she would,” he said ominously. “I could
then deal with her.”

“So could I,” echoed his father, who was feeling rather in the cold.
Charles had been kind in undertaking the funeral arrangements and in
telling him to eat his breakfast, but the boy as he grew up was a little
dictatorial, and assumed the post of chairman too readily. “I could deal
with her, if she comes, but she won’t come. You’re all a bit hard on
Miss Schlegel.”

“That Paul business was pretty scandalous, though.”

“I want no more of the Paul business, Charles, as I said at the time,
and besides, it is quite apart from this business. Margaret Schlegel has
been officious and tiresome during this terrible week, and we have
all suffered under her, but upon my soul she’s honest. She’s NOT in
collusion with the matron. I’m absolutely certain of it. Nor was she
with the doctor, I’m equally certain of that. She did not hide anything
from us, for up to that very afternoon she was as ignorant as we are.
She, like ourselves, was a dupe--” He stopped for a moment. “You see,
Charles, in her terrible pain your mother put us all in false positions.
Paul would not have left England, you would not have gone to Italy, nor
Evie and I into Yorkshire, if only we had known. Well, Miss Schlegel’s
position has been equally false. Take all in all, she has not come out
of it badly.”

Evie said: “But those chrysanthemums--”

“Or coming down to the funeral at all--” echoed Dolly.

“Why shouldn’t she come down? She had the right to, and she stood far
back among the Hilton women. The flowers--certainly we should not have
sent such flowers, but they may have seemed the right thing to her,
Evie, and for all you know they may be the custom in Germany.”

“Oh, I forget she isn’t really English,” cried Evie. “That would explain
a lot.”

“She’s a cosmopolitan,” said Charles, looking at his watch. “I admit I’m
rather down on cosmopolitans. My fault, doubtless. I cannot stand them,
and a German cosmopolitan is the limit. I think that’s about all, isn’t
it? I want to run down and see Chalkeley. A bicycle will do. And, by the
way, I wish you’d speak to Crane some time. I’m certain he’s had my new
car out.”

“Has he done it any harm?”

“No.”

“In that case I shall let it pass. It’s not worth while having a row.”

Charles and his father sometimes disagreed. But they always parted
with an increased regard for one another, and each desired no doughtier
comrade when it was necessary to voyage for a little past the emotions.
So the sailors of Ulysses voyaged past the Sirens, having first stopped
one another’s ears with wool.



CHAPTER XII

Charles need not have been anxious. Miss Schlegel had never heard of his
mother’s strange request. She was to hear of it in after years, when she
had built up her life differently, and it was to fit into position as
the headstone of the corner. Her mind was bent on other questions
now, and by her also it would have been rejected as the fantasy of an
invalid.

She was parting from these Wilcoxes for the second time. Paul and his
mother, ripple and great wave, had flowed into her life and ebbed out of
it for ever. The ripple had left no traces behind; the wave had strewn
at her feet fragments torn from the unknown. A curious seeker, she stood
for a while at the verge of the sea that tells so little, but tells
a little, and watched the outgoing of this last tremendous tide. Her
friend had vanished in agony, but not, she believed, in degradation.
Her withdrawal had hinted at other things besides disease and pain. Some
leave our life with tears, others with an insane frigidity; Mrs. Wilcox
had taken the middle course, which only rarer natures can pursue. She
had kept proportion. She had told a little of her grim secret to her
friends, but not too much; she had shut up her heart--almost, but
not entirely. It is thus, if there is any rule, that we ought to
die--neither as victim nor as fanatic, but as the seafarer who can greet
with an equal eye the deep that he is entering, and the shore that he
must leave.

The last word--whatever it would be--had certainly not been said in
Hilton churchyard. She had not died there. A funeral is not death, any
more than baptism is birth or marriage union. All three are the clumsy
devices, coming now too late, now too early, by which Society would
register the quick motions of man. In Margaret’s eyes Mrs. Wilcox had
escaped registration. She had gone out of life vividly, her own way, and
no dust was so truly dust as the contents of that heavy coffin, lowered
with ceremonial until it rested on the dust of the earth, no flowers so
utterly wasted as the chrysanthemums that the frost must have withered
before morning. Margaret had once said she “loved superstition.” It was
not true. Few women had tried more earnestly to pierce the accretions in
which body and soul are enwrapped. The death of Mrs. Wilcox had helped
her in her work. She saw a little more clearly than hitherto what a
human being is, and to what he may aspire. Truer relationships gleamed.
Perhaps the last word would be hope--hope even on this side of the
grave.

Meanwhile, she could take an interest in the survivors. In spite of her
Christmas duties, in spite of her brother, the Wilcoxes continued to
play a considerable part in her thoughts. She had seen so much of them
in the final week. They were not “her sort,” they were often suspicious
and stupid, and deficient where she excelled; but collision with them
stimulated her, and she felt an interest that verged into liking, even
for Charles. She desired to protect them, and often felt that they could
protect her, excelling where she was deficient. Once past the rocks of
emotion, they knew so well what to do, whom to send for; their hands
were on all the ropes, they had grit as well as grittiness and she
valued grit enormously. They led a life that she could not attain
to--the outer life of “telegrams and anger,” which had detonated when
Helen and Paul had touched in June, and had detonated again the other
week. To Margaret this life was to remain a real force. She could not
despise it, as Helen and Tibby affected to do. It fostered such virtues
as neatness, decision, and obedience, virtues of the second rank, no
doubt, but they have formed our civilisation. They form character, too;
Margaret could not doubt it; they keep the soul from becoming sloppy.
How dare Schlegels despise Wilcoxes, when it takes all sorts to make a
world?

“Don’t brood too much,” she wrote to Helen, “on the superiority of
the unseen to the seen. It’s true, but to brood on it is medieval. Our
business is not to contrast the two, but to reconcile them.”

Helen replied that she had no intention of brooding on such a dull
subject. What did her sister take her for? The weather was magnificent.
She and the Mosebachs had gone tobogganing on the only hill that
Pomerania boasted. It was fun, but over-crowded, for the rest of
Pomerania had gone there too. Helen loved the country, and her letter
glowed with physical exercise and poetry. She spoke of the scenery,
quiet, yet august; of the snow-clad fields, with their scampering herds
of deer; of the river and its quaint entrance into the Baltic Sea; of
the Oderberge, only three hundred feet high, from which one slid all too
quickly back into the Pomeranian plains, and yet these Oderberge were
real mountains, with pine-forests, streams, and views complete. “It
isn’t size that counts so much as the way things are arranged.” In
another paragraph she referred to Mrs. Wilcox sympathetically, but the
news had not bitten into her. She had not realised the accessories
of death, which are in a sense more memorable than death itself. The
atmosphere of precautions and recriminations, and in the midst a human
body growing more vivid because it was in pain; the end of that body in
Hilton churchyard; the survival of something that suggested hope, vivid
in its turn against life’s workaday cheerfulness;--all these were lost
to Helen, who only felt that a pleasant lady could now be pleasant no
longer. She returned to Wickham Place full of her own affairs--she had
had another proposal--and Margaret, after a moment’s hesitation, was
content that this should be so.

The proposal had not been a serious matter. It was the work of Fraulein
Mosebach, who had conceived the large and patriotic notion of winning
back her cousins to the Fatherland by matrimony. England had played Paul
Wilcox, and lost; Germany played Herr Forstmeister some one--Helen could
not remember his name. Herr Forstmeister lived in a wood, and, standing
on the summit of the Oderberge, he had pointed out his house to Helen,
or rather, had pointed out the wedge of pines in which it lay. She had
exclaimed, “Oh, how lovely! That’s the place for me!” and in the evening
Frieda appeared in her bedroom. “I have a message, dear Helen,” etc.,
and so she had, but had been very nice when Helen laughed; quite
understood--a forest too solitary and damp--quite agreed, but Herr
Forstmeister believed he had assurance to the contrary. Germany had
lost, but with good-humour; holding the manhood of the world, she felt
bound to win. “And there will even be some one for Tibby,” concluded
Helen. “There now, Tibby, think of that; Frieda is saving up a little
girl for you, in pig-tails and white worsted stockings but the feet
of the stockings are pink as if the little girl had trodden in
strawberries. I’ve talked too much. My head aches. Now you talk.”

Tibby consented to talk. He too was full of his own affairs, for he had
just been up to try for a scholarship at Oxford. The men were down, and
the candidates had been housed in various colleges, and had dined in
hall. Tibby was sensitive to beauty, the experience was new, and he
gave a description of his visit that was almost glowing. The august and
mellow University, soaked with the richness of the western counties that
it has served for a thousand years, appealed at once to the boy’s taste;
it was the kind of thing he could understand, and he understood it
all the better because it was empty. Oxford is--Oxford; not a mere
receptacle for youth, like Cambridge. Perhaps it wants its inmates to
love it rather than to love one another; such at all events was to
be its effect on Tibby. His sisters sent him there that he might make
friends, for they knew that his education had been cranky, and had
severed him from other boys and men. He made no friends. His Oxford
remained Oxford empty, and he took into life with him, not the memory of
a radiance, but the memory of a colour scheme.

It pleased Margaret to hear her brother and sister talking. They did
not get on overwell as a rule. For a few moments she listened to them,
feeling elderly and benign.

Then something occurred to her, and she interrupted.

“Helen, I told you about poor Mrs. Wilcox; that sad business?”

“Yes.”

“I have had a correspondence with her son. He was winding up the estate,
and wrote to ask me whether his mother had wanted me to have anything.
I thought it good of him, considering I knew her so little. I said that
she had once spoken of giving me a Christmas present, but we both forgot
about it afterwards.”

“I hope Charles took the hint.”

“Yes--that is to say, her husband wrote later on, and thanked me for
being a little kind to her, and actually gave me her silver vinaigrette.
Don’t you think that is extraordinarily generous? It has made me
like him very much. He hopes that this will not be the end of our
acquaintance, but that you and I will go and stop with Evie some time in
the future. I like Mr. Wilcox. He is taking up his work--rubber--it is
a big business. I gather he is launching out rather. Charles is in it,
too. Charles is married--a pretty little creature, but she doesn’t seem
wise. They took on the flat, but now they have gone off to a house of
their own.”

Helen, after a decent pause, continued her account of Stettin. How
quickly a situation changes! In June she had been in a crisis; even in
November she could blush and be unnatural; now it was January and
the whole affair lay forgotten. Looking back on the past six months,
Margaret realised the chaotic nature of our daily life, and its
difference from the orderly sequence that has been fabricated by
historians. Actual life is full of false clues and sign-posts that lead
nowhere. With infinite effort we nerve ourselves for a crisis that never
comes. The most successful career must show a waste of strength that
might have removed mountains, and the most unsuccessful is not that
of the man who is taken unprepared, but of him who has prepared and is
never taken. On a tragedy of that kind our national morality is duly
silent. It assumes that preparation against danger is in itself a good,
and that men, like nations, are the better for staggering through life
fully armed. The tragedy of preparedness has scarcely been handled, save
by the Greeks. Life is indeed dangerous, but not in the way morality
would have us believe. It is indeed unmanageable, but the essence of
it is not a battle. It is unmanageable because it is a romance, and its
essence is romantic beauty. Margaret hoped that for the future she would
be less cautious, not more cautious, than she had been in the past.



CHAPTER XIII

Over two years passed, and the Schlegel household continued to lead its
life of cultured, but not ignoble, ease, still swimming gracefully on
the grey tides of London. Concerts and plays swept past them, money had
been spent and renewed, reputations won and lost, and the city herself,
emblematic of their lives, rose and fell in a continual flux, while her
shallows washed more widely against the hills of Surrey and over the
fields of Hertfordshire. This famous building had arisen, that was
doomed. To-day Whitehall had been transformed; it would be the turn
of Regent Street to-morrow. And month by month the roads smelt more
strongly of petrol, and were more difficult to cross, and human beings
heard each other speak with greater difficulty, breathed less of the
air, and saw less of the sky. Nature withdrew; the leaves were falling
by midsummer; the sun shone through dirt with an admired obscurity.

To speak against London is no longer fashionable. The Earth as an
artistic cult has had its day, and the literature of the near future
will probably ignore the country and seek inspiration from the town. One
can understand the reaction. Of Pan and the elemental forces, the public
has heard a little too much--they seem Victorian, while London is
Georgian--and those who care for the earth with sincerity may wait long
ere the pendulum swings back to her again. Certainly London fascinates.
One visualises it as a tract of quivering grey, intelligent without
purpose, and excitable without love; as a spirit that has altered before
it can be chronicled; as a heart that certainly beats, but with no
pulsation of humanity. It lies beyond everything; Nature, with all
her cruelty, comes nearer to us than do these crowds of men. A friend
explains himself; the earth is explicable--from her we came, and we must
return to her. But who can explain Westminster Bridge Road or Liverpool
Street in the morning--the city inhaling--or the same thoroughfares
in the evening--the city exhaling her exhausted air? We reach in
desperation beyond the fog, beyond the very stars, the voids of the
universe are ransacked to justify the monster, and stamped with a human
face. London is religion’s opportunity--not the decorous religion of
theologians, but anthropomorphic, crude. Yes, the continuous flow
would be tolerable if a man of our own sort--not any one pompous or
tearful--were caring for us up in the sky.

The Londoner seldom understands his city until it sweeps him, too, away
from his moorings, and Margaret’s eyes were not opened until the lease
of Wickham Place expired. She had always known that it must expire, but
the knowledge only became vivid about nine months before the event.
Then the house was suddenly ringed with pathos. It had seen so much
happiness. Why had it to be swept away? In the streets of the city
she noted for the first time the architecture of hurry and heard the
language of hurry on the mouths of its inhabitants--clipped words,
formless sentences, potted expressions of approval or disgust. Month by
month things were stepping livelier, but to what goal? The population
still rose, but what was the quality of the men born? The particular
millionaire who owned the freehold of Wickham Place, and desired to
erect Babylonian flats upon it--what right had he to stir so large a
portion of the quivering jelly? He was not a fool--she had heard him
expose Socialism--but true insight began just where his intelligence
ended, and one gathered that this was the case with most millionaires.
What right had such men--But Margaret checked herself. That way lies
madness. Thank goodness, she, too, had some money, and could purchase a
new home.

Tibby, now in his second year at Oxford, was down for the Easter
vacation, and Margaret took the opportunity of having a serious talk
with him. Did he at all know where he wanted to live? Tibby didn’t
know that he did know. Did he at all know what he wanted to do? He was
equally uncertain, but when pressed remarked that he should prefer to
be quite free of any profession. Margaret was not shocked, but went on
sewing for a few minutes before she replied:

“I was thinking of Mr. Vyse. He never strikes me as particularly happy.”

“Ye--es.” said Tibby, and then held his mouth open in a curious quiver,
as if he, too, had thought of Mr. Vyse, had seen round, through, over,
and beyond Mr. Vyse, had weighed Mr. Vyse, grouped him, and finally
dismissed him as having no possible bearing on the Subject under
discussion. That bleat of Tibby’s infuriated Helen. But Helen was now
down in the dining room preparing a speech about political economy. At
times her voice could be heard declaiming through the floor.

“But Mr. Vyse is rather a wretched, weedy man, don’t you think? Then
there’s Guy. That was a pitiful business. Besides”--shifting to the
general--“every one is the better for some regular work.”

Groans.

“I shall stick to it,” she continued, smiling. “I am not saying it
to educate you; it is what I really think. I believe that in the last
century men have developed the desire for work, and they must not starve
it. It’s a new desire. It goes with a great deal that’s bad, but in
itself it’s good, and I hope that for women, too, ‘not to work’ will
soon become as shocking as ‘not to be married’ was a hundred years ago.”

“I have no experience of this profound desire to which you allude,”
 enunciated Tibby.

“Then we’ll leave the subject till you do. I’m not going to rattle you
round. Take your time. Only do think over the lives of the men you like
most, and see how they’ve arranged them.”

“I like Guy and Mr. Vyse most,” said Tibby faintly, and leant so far
back in his chair that he extended in a horizontal line from knees to
throat.

“And don’t think I’m not serious because I don’t use the traditional
arguments--making money, a sphere awaiting you, and so on--all of which
are, for various reasons, cant.” She sewed on. “I’m only your sister.
I haven’t any authority over you, and I don’t want to have any. Just
to put before you what I think the Truth. You see”--she shook off the
pince-nez to which she had recently taken--“in a few years we shall be
the same age practically, and I shall want you to help me. Men are so
much nicer than women.”

“Labouring under such a delusion, why do you not marry?”

“I sometimes jolly well think I would if I got the chance.”

“Has nobody arst you?”

“Only ninnies.”

“Do people ask Helen?”

“Plentifully.”

“Tell me about them.”

“No.”

“Tell me about your ninnies, then.”

“They were men who had nothing better to do,” said his sister, feeling
that she was entitled to score this point. “So take warning; you must
work, or else you must pretend to work, which is what I do. Work, work,
work if you’d save your soul and your body. It is honestly a necessity,
dear boy. Look at the Wilcoxes, look at Mr. Pembroke. With all their
defects of temper and understanding, such men give me more pleasure than
many who are better equipped, and I think it is because they have worked
regularly and honestly.”

“Spare me the Wilcoxes,” he moaned.

“I shall not. They are the right sort.”

“Oh, goodness me, Meg--!” he protested, suddenly sitting up, alert and
angry. Tibby, for all his defects, had a genuine personality.

“Well, they’re as near the right sort as you can imagine.”

“No, no--oh, no!”

“I was thinking of the younger son, whom I once classed as a ninny,
but who came back so ill from Nigeria. He’s gone out there again, Evie
Wilcox tells me--out to his duty.”

“Duty” always elicited a groan.

“He doesn’t want the money, it is work he wants, though it is beastly
work--dull country, dishonest natives, an eternal fidget over fresh
water and food... A nation that can produce men of that sort may well be
proud. No wonder England has become an Empire.”

“EMPIRE!”

“I can’t bother over results,” said Margaret, a little sadly. “They are
too difficult for me. I can only look at the men. An Empire bores me,
so far, but I can appreciate the heroism that builds it up. London
bores me, but what thousands of splendid people are labouring to make
London--”

“What it is,” he sneered.

“What it is, worse luck. I want activity without civilisation. How
paradoxical! Yet I expect that is what we shall find in heaven.”

“And I,” said Tibby, “want civilisation without activity, which, I
expect, is what we shall find in the other place.”

“You needn’t go as far as the other place, Tibbikins, if you want that.
You can find it at Oxford.”

“Stupid--”

“If I’m stupid, get me back to the house-hunting. I’ll even live in
Oxford if you like--North Oxford. I’ll live anywhere except Bournemouth,
Torquay, and Cheltenham. Oh yes, or Ilfracombe and Swanage and Tunbridge
Wells and Surbiton and Bedford. There on no account.”

“London, then.”

“I agree, but Helen rather wants to get away from London. However,
there’s no reason we shouldn’t have a house in the country and also a
flat in town, provided we all stick together and contribute. Though of
course--Oh, how one does maunder on and to think, to think of the people
who are really poor. How do they live? Not to move about the world would
kill me.”

As she spoke, the door was flung open, and Helen burst in in a state of
extreme excitement.

“Oh, my dears, what do you think? You’ll never guess. A woman’s been
here asking me for her husband. Her WHAT?” (Helen was fond of supplying
her own surprise.) “Yes, for her husband, and it really is so.”

“Not anything to do with Bracknell?” cried Margaret, who had lately
taken on an unemployed of that name to clean the knives and boots.

“I offered Bracknell, and he was rejected. So was Tibby. (Cheer up,
Tibby!) It’s no one we know. I said, ‘Hunt, my good woman; have a good
look round, hunt under the tables, poke up the chimney, shake out the
antimacassars. Husband? husband?’ Oh, and she so magnificently dressed
and tinkling like a chandelier.”

“Now, Helen, what did really happen?”

“What I say. I was, as it were, orating my speech. Annie opens the door
like a fool, and shows a female straight in on me, with my mouth open.
Then we began--very civilly. ‘I want my husband, what I have reason to
believe is here.’ No--how unjust one is. She said ‘whom,’ not ‘what.’
She got it perfectly. So I said, ‘Name, please?’ and she said, ‘Lan,
Miss,’ and there we were.”

“Lan?”

“Lan or Len. We were not nice about our vowels. Lanoline.”

“But what an extraordinary--”

“I said, ‘My good Mrs. Lanoline, we have some grave misunderstanding
here. Beautiful as I am, my modesty is even more remarkable than my
beauty, and never, never has Mr. Lanoline rested his eyes on mine.’”

“I hope you were pleased,” said Tibby.

“Of course,” Helen squeaked. “A perfectly delightful experience.
Oh, Mrs. Lanoline’s a dear--she asked for a husband as if he were
an umbrella. She mislaid him Saturday afternoon--and for a long time
suffered no inconvenience. But all night, and all this morning her
apprehensions grew. Breakfast didn’t seem the same--no, no more did
lunch, and so she strolled up to 2 Wickham Place as being the most
likely place for the missing article.”

“But how on earth--”

“Don’t begin how on earthing. ‘I know what I know,’ she kept repeating,
not uncivilly, but with extreme gloom. In vain I asked her what she did
know. Some knew what others knew, and others didn’t, and then others
again had better be careful. Oh dear, she was incompetent! She had
a face like a silkworm, and the dining-room reeks of orris-root. We
chatted pleasantly a little about husbands, and I wondered where hers
was too, and advised her to go to the police. She thanked me. We agreed
that Mr. Lanoline’s a notty, notty man, and hasn’t no business to go
on the lardy-da. But I think she suspected me up to the last. Bags I
writing to Aunt Juley about this. Now, Meg, remember--bags I.”

“Bag it by all means,” murmured Margaret, putting down her work. “I’m
not sure that this is so funny, Helen. It means some horrible volcano
smoking somewhere, doesn’t it?”

“I don’t think so--she doesn’t really mind. The admirable creature isn’t
capable of tragedy.”

“Her husband may be, though,” said Margaret, moving to the window.

“Oh no, not likely. No one capable of tragedy could have married Mrs.
Lanoline.”

“Was she pretty?”

“Her figure may have been good once.”

The flats, their only outlook, hung like an ornate curtain between
Margaret and the welter of London. Her thoughts turned sadly
to house-hunting. Wickham Place had been so safe. She feared,
fantastically, that her own little flock might be moving into turmoil
and squalor, into nearer contact with such episodes as these.

“Tibby and I have again been wondering where we’ll live next September,”
 she said at last.

“Tibby had better first wonder what he’ll do,” retorted Helen; and that
topic was resumed, but with acrimony. Then tea came, and after tea Helen
went on preparing her speech, and Margaret prepared one, too, for they
were going out to a discussion society on the morrow. But her thoughts
were poisoned. Mrs. Lanoline had risen out of the abyss, like a faint
smell, a goblin football, telling of a life where love and hatred had
both decayed.



CHAPTER XIV

The mystery, like so many mysteries, was explained. Next day, just as
they were dressed to go out to dinner, a Mr. Bast called. He was a clerk
in the employment of the Porphyrion Fire Insurance Company. Thus much
from his card. He had come “about the lady yesterday.” Thus much from
Annie, who had shown him into the dining-room.

“Cheers, children!” cried Helen. “It’s Mrs. Lanoline.”

Tibby was interested. The three hurried downstairs, to find, not the
gay dog they expected, but a young man, colourless, toneless, who had
already the mournful eyes above a drooping moustache that are so
common in London, and that haunt some streets of the city like accusing
presences. One guessed him as the third generation, grandson to the
shepherd or ploughboy whom civilisation had sucked into the town; as one
of the thousands who have lost the life of the body and failed to reach
the life of the spirit. Hints of robustness survived in him, more than a
hint of primitive good looks, and Margaret, noting the spine that might
have been straight, and the chest that might have broadened, wondered
whether it paid to give up the glory of the animal for a tail coat and a
couple of ideas. Culture had worked in her own case, but during the last
few weeks she had doubted whether it humanised the majority, so wide
and so widening is the gulf that stretches between the natural and the
philosophic man, so many the good chaps who are wrecked in trying to
cross it. She knew this type very well--the vague aspirations, the
mental dishonesty, the familiarity with the outsides of books. She knew
the very tones in which he would address her. She was only unprepared
for an example of her own visiting-card.

“You wouldn’t remember giving me this, Miss Schlegel?” said he, uneasily
familiar.

“No; I can’t say I do.”

“Well, that was how it happened, you see.”

“Where did we meet, Mr. Bast? For the minute I don’t remember.”

“It was a concert at the Queen’s Hall. I think you will recollect,” he
added pretentiously, “when I tell you that it included a performance of
the Fifth Symphony of Beethoven.”

“We hear the Fifth practically every time it’s done, so I’m not sure--do
you remember, Helen?”

“Was it the time the sandy cat walked round the balustrade?”

He thought not.

“Then I don’t remember. That’s the only Beethoven I ever remember
specially.”

“And you, if I may say so, took away my umbrella, inadvertently of
course.”

“Likely enough,” Helen laughed, “for I steal umbrellas even oftener than
I hear Beethoven. Did you get it back?”

“Yes, thank you, Miss Schlegel.”

“The mistake arose out of my card, did it?” interposed Margaret.

“Yes, the mistake arose--it was a mistake.”

“The lady who called here yesterday thought that you were calling too,
and that she could find you?” she continued, pushing him forward, for,
though he had promised an explanation, he seemed unable to give one.

“That’s so, calling too--a mistake.”

“Then why--?” began Helen, but Margaret laid a hand on her arm.

“I said to my wife,” he continued more rapidly “I said to Mrs. Bast, ‘I
have to pay a call on some friends,’ and Mrs. Bast said to me, ‘Do go.’
While I was gone, however, she wanted me on important business, and
thought I had come here, owing to the card, and so came after me, and I
beg to tender my apologies, and hers as well, for any inconvenience we
may have inadvertently caused you.”

“No inconvenience,” said Helen; “but I still don’t understand.”

An air of evasion characterised Mr. Bast. He explained again, but was
obviously lying, and Helen didn’t see why he should get off. She had the
cruelty of youth. Neglecting her sister’s pressure, she said, “I still
don’t understand. When did you say you paid this call?”

“Call? What call?” said he, staring as if her question had been a
foolish one, a favourite device of those in mid-stream.

“This afternoon call.”

“In the afternoon, of course!” he replied, and looked at Tibby to see
how the repartee went. But Tibby was unsympathetic, and said, “Saturday
afternoon or Sunday afternoon?”

“S--Saturday.”

“Really!” said Helen; “and you were still calling on Sunday, when your
wife came here. A long visit.”

“I don’t call that fair,” said Mr. Bast, going scarlet and handsome.
There was fight in his eyes. “I know what you mean, and it isn’t so.”

“Oh, don’t let us mind,” said Margaret, distressed again by odours from
the abyss.

“It was something else,” he asserted, his elaborate manner breaking
down. “I was somewhere else to what you think, so there!”

“It was good of you to come and explain,” she said. “The rest is
naturally no concern of ours.”

“Yes, but I want--I wanted--have you ever read The Ordeal of Richard
Feverel?”

Margaret nodded.

“It’s a beautiful book. I wanted to get back to the earth, don’t you
see, like Richard does in the end. Or have you ever read Stevenson’s
Prince Otto?”

Helen and Tibby groaned gently.

“That’s another beautiful book. You get back to the earth in that. I
wanted--” He mouthed affectedly. Then through the mists of his culture
came a hard fact, hard as a pebble. “I walked all the Saturday night,”
 said Leonard. “I walked.” A thrill of approval ran through the sisters.
But culture closed in again. He asked whether they had ever read E. V.
Lucas’s Open Road.

Said Helen, “No doubt it’s another beautiful book, but I’d rather hear
about your road.”

“Oh, I walked.”

“How far?”

“I don’t know, nor for how long. It got too dark to see my watch.”

“Were you walking alone, may I ask?”

“Yes,” he said, straightening himself; “but we’d been talking it over at
the office. There’s been a lot of talk at the office lately about these
things. The fellows there said one steers by the Pole Star, and I looked
it up in the celestial atlas, but once out of doors everything gets so
mixed.”

“Don’t talk to me about the Pole Star,” interrupted Helen, who was
becoming interested. “I know its little ways. It goes round and round,
and you go round after it.”

“Well, I lost it entirely. First of all the street lamps, then the
trees, and towards morning it got cloudy.”

Tibby, who preferred his comedy undiluted, slipped from the room. He
knew that this fellow would never attain to poetry, and did not want to
hear him trying.

Margaret and Helen remained. Their brother influenced them more than
they knew; in his absence they were stirred to enthusiasm more easily.

“Where did you start from?” cried Margaret. “Do tell us more.”

“I took the Underground to Wimbledon. As I came out of the office I said
to myself, ‘I must have a walk once in a way. If I don’t take this walk
now, I shall never take it.’ I had a bit of dinner at Wimbledon, and
then--”

“But not good country there, is it?”

“It was gas-lamps for hours. Still, I had all the night, and being out
was the great thing. I did get into woods, too, presently.”

“Yes, go on,” said Helen.

“You’ve no idea how difficult uneven ground is when it’s dark.”

“Did you actually go off the roads?”

“Oh yes. I always meant to go off the roads, but the worst of it is that
it’s more difficult to find one’s way.”

“Mr. Bast, you’re a born adventurer,” laughed Margaret. “No professional
athlete would have attempted what you’ve done. It’s a wonder your walk
didn’t end in a broken neck. Whatever did your wife say?”

“Professional athletes never move without lanterns and compasses,” said
Helen. “Besides, they can’t walk. It tires them. Go on.”

“I felt like R. L. S. You probably remember how in Virginibus.”

“Yes, but the wood. This ‘ere wood. How did you get out of it?”

“I managed one wood, and found a road the other side which went a good
bit uphill. I rather fancy it was those North Downs, for the road went
off into grass, and I got into another wood. That was awful, with gorse
bushes. I did wish I’d never come, but suddenly it got light--just while
I seemed going under one tree. Then I found a road down to a station,
and took the first train I could back to London.”

“But was the dawn wonderful?” asked Helen.

With unforgettable sincerity he replied, “No.” The word flew again like
a pebble from the sling. Down toppled all that had seemed ignoble or
literary in his talk, down toppled tiresome R. L. S. and the “love of
the earth” and his silk top-hat. In the presence of these women Leonard
had arrived, and he spoke with a flow, an exultation, that he had seldom
known.

“The dawn was only grey, it was nothing to mention.”

“Just a grey evening turned upside down. I know.”

“--and I was too tired to lift up my head to look at it, and so cold
too. I’m glad I did it, and yet at the time it bored me more than I can
say. And besides--you can believe me or not as you choose--I was very
hungry. That dinner at Wimbledon--I meant it to last me all night
like other dinners. I never thought that walking would make such a
difference. Why, when you’re walking you want, as it were, a breakfast
and luncheon and tea during the night as well, and I’d nothing but a
packet of Woodbines. Lord, I did feel bad! Looking back, it wasn’t what
you may call enjoyment. It was more a case of sticking to it. I did
stick. I--I was determined. Oh, hang it all! what’s the good--I mean,
the good of living in a room for ever? There one goes on day after day,
same old game, same up and down to town, until you forget there is any
other game. You ought to see once in a way what’s going on outside, if
it’s only nothing particular after all.”

“I should just think you ought,” said Helen, sitting on the edge of the
table.

The sound of a lady’s voice recalled him from sincerity, and he said:
“Curious it should all come about from reading something of Richard
Jefferies.”

“Excuse me, Mr. Bast, but you’re wrong there. It didn’t. It came from
something far greater.”

But she could not stop him. Borrow was imminent after Jefferies--Borrow,
Thoreau, and sorrow. R. L. S. brought up the rear, and the outburst
ended in a swamp of books. No disrespect to these great names. The fault
is ours, not theirs. They mean us to use them for sign-posts, and are not
to blame if, in our weakness, we mistake the sign-post for the destination.
And Leonard had reached the destination. He had visited the county of
Surrey when darkness covered its amenities, and its cosy villas had
re-entered ancient night. Every twelve hours this miracle happens, but he
had troubled to go and see for himself. Within his cramped little mind
dwelt something that was greater than Jefferies’ books--the spirit that led
Jefferies to write them; and his dawn, though revealing nothing but
monotones, was part of the eternal sunrise that shows George Borrow
Stonehenge.

“Then you don’t think I was foolish?” he asked becoming again the naive
and sweet-tempered boy for whom Nature intended him.

“Heavens, no!” replied Margaret.

“Heaven help us if we do!” replied Helen.

“I’m very glad you say that. Now, my wife would never understand--not if
I explained for days.”

“No, it wasn’t foolish!” cried Helen, her eyes aflame. “You’ve pushed
back the boundaries; I think it splendid of you.”

“You’ve not been content to dream as we have--”

“Though we have walked, too--”

“I must show you a picture upstairs--”

Here the door-bell rang. The hansom had come to take them to their
evening party.

“Oh, bother, not to say dash--I had forgotten we were dining out; but
do, do, come round again and have a talk.” “Yes, you must--do,” echoed
Margaret.

Leonard, with extreme sentiment, replied: “No, I shall not. It’s better
like this.”

“Why better?” asked Margaret.

“No, it is better not to risk a second interview. I shall always look
back on this talk with you as one of the finest things in my life.
Really. I mean this. We can never repeat. It has done me real good, and
there we had better leave it.”

“That’s rather a sad view of life, surely.”

“Things so often get spoiled.”

“I know,” flashed Helen, “but people don’t.”

He could not understand this. He continued in a vein which mingled true
imagination and false. What he said wasn’t wrong, but it wasn’t right,
and a false note jarred. One little twist, they felt, and the instrument
might be in tune. One little strain, and it might be silent for ever. He
thanked the ladies very much, but he would not call again. There was a
moment’s awkwardness, and then Helen said: “Go, then; perhaps you know
best; but never forget you’re better than Jefferies.” And he went. Their
hansom caught him up at the corner, passed with a waving of hands, and
vanished with its accomplished load into the evening.

London was beginning to illuminate herself against the night. Electric
lights sizzled and jagged in the main thoroughfares, gas-lamps in the
side streets glimmered a canary gold or green. The sky was a crimson
battlefield of spring, but London was not afraid. Her smoke mitigated
the splendour, and the clouds down Oxford Street were a delicately
painted ceiling, which adorned while it did not distract. She had never
known the clear-cut armies of the purer air. Leonard hurried through her
tinted wonders, very much part of the picture. His was a grey life,
and to brighten it he had ruled off a few corners for romance. The Miss
Schlegels--or, to speak more accurately, his interview with them--were
to fill such a corner, nor was it by any means the first time that
he had talked intimately to strangers. The habit was analogous to a
debauch, an outlet, though the worst of outlets, for instincts that
would not be denied. Terrifying him, it would beat down his suspicions
and prudence until he was confiding secrets to people whom he had
scarcely seen. It brought him many fears and some pleasant memories.
Perhaps the keenest happiness he had ever known was during a railway
journey to Cambridge, where a decent-mannered undergraduate had spoken
to him. They had got into conversation, and gradually Leonard flung
reticence aside, told some of his domestic troubles and hinted at the
rest. The undergraduate, supposing they could start a friendship, asked
him to “coffee after hall,” which he accepted, but afterwards grew shy,
and took care not to stir from the commercial hotel where he lodged.
He did not want Romance to collide with the Porphyrion, still less with
Jacky, and people with fuller, happier lives are slow to understand
this. To the Schlegels, as to the undergraduate, he was an interesting
creature, of whom they wanted to see more. But they to him were denizens
of Romance, who must keep to the corner he had assigned them, pictures
that must not walk out of their frames.

His behaviour over Margaret’s visiting-card had been typical. His
had scarcely been a tragic marriage. Where there is no money and no
inclination to violence tragedy cannot be generated. He could not leave
his wife, and he did not want to hit her. Petulance and squalor were
enough. Here “that card” had come in. Leonard, though furtive, was
untidy, and left it lying about. Jacky found it, and then began, “What’s
that card, eh?” “Yes, don’t you wish you knew what that card was?” “Len,
who’s Miss Schlegel?” etc. Months passed, and the card, now as a joke,
now as a grievance, was handed about, getting dirtier and dirtier. It
followed them when they moved from Camelia Road to Tulse Hill. It was
submitted to third parties. A few inches of pasteboard, it became the
battlefield on which the souls of Leonard and his wife contended. Why
did he not say, “A lady took my umbrella, another gave me this that I
might call for my umbrella”? Because Jacky would have disbelieved him?
Partly, but chiefly because he was sentimental. No affection gathered
round the card, but it symbolised the life of culture, that Jacky should
never spoil. At night he would say to himself, “Well, at all events, she
doesn’t know about that card. Yah! done her there!”

Poor Jacky! she was not a bad sort, and had a great deal to bear.
She drew her own conclusion--she was only capable of drawing one
conclusion--and in the fulness of time she acted upon it. All the Friday
Leonard had refused to speak to her, and had spent the evening observing
the stars. On the Saturday he went up, as usual, to town, but he came
not back Saturday night, nor Sunday morning, nor Sunday afternoon. The
inconvenience grew intolerable, and though she was now of a retiring
habit, and shy of women, she went up to Wickham Place. Leonard returned
in her absence. The card, the fatal card, was gone from the pages of
Ruskin, and he guessed what had happened.

“Well?” he had exclaimed, greeting her with peals of laughter. “I know
where you’ve been, but you don’t know where I’ve been.”

Jacky sighed, said, “Len, I do think you might explain,” and resumed
domesticity.

Explanations were difficult at this stage, and Leonard was too silly--or
it is tempting to write, too sound a chap to attempt them. His reticence
was not entirely the shoddy article that a business life promotes, the
reticence that pretends that nothing is something, and hides behind
the Daily Telegraph. The adventurer, also, is reticent, and it is an
adventure for a clerk to walk for a few hours in darkness. You may laugh
at him, you who have slept nights out on the veldt, with your rifle
beside you and all the atmosphere of adventure pat. And you also may
laugh who think adventures silly. But do not be surprised if Leonard is
shy whenever he meets you, and if the Schlegels rather than Jacky hear
about the dawn.

That the Schlegels had not thought him foolish became a permanent
joy. He was at his best when he thought of them. It buoyed him as he
journeyed home beneath fading heavens. Somehow the barriers of wealth
had fallen, and there had been--he could not phrase it--a general
assertion of the wonder of the world. “My conviction,” says the mystic,
“gains infinitely the moment another soul will believe in it,” and they
had agreed that there was something beyond life’s daily grey. He took
off his top-hat and smoothed it thoughtfully. He had hitherto supposed
the unknown to be books, literature, clever conversation, culture. One
raised oneself by study, and got upsides with the world. But in that
quick interchange a new light dawned. Was that “something” walking in
the dark among the suburban hills?

He discovered that he was going bareheaded down Regent Street. London
came back with a rush. Few were about at this hour, but all whom he
passed looked at him with a hostility that was the more impressive
because it was unconscious. He put his hat on. It was too big; his head
disappeared like a pudding into a basin, the ears bending outwards at
the touch of the curly brim. He wore it a little backwards, and its
effect was greatly to elongate the face and to bring out the distance
between the eyes and the moustache. Thus equipped, he escaped criticism.
No one felt uneasy as he titupped along the pavements, the heart of a
man ticking fast in his chest.



CHAPTER XV

The sisters went out to dinner full of their adventure, and when they
were both full of the same subject, there were few dinner-parties that
could stand up against them. This particular one, which was all ladies,
had more kick in it than most, but succumbed after a struggle. Helen at
one part of the table, Margaret at the other, would talk of Mr. Bast
and of no one else, and somewhere about the entree their monologues
collided, fell ruining, and became common property. Nor was this all.
The dinner-party was really an informal discussion club; there was a
paper after it, read amid coffee-cups and laughter in the drawing-room,
but dealing more or less thoughtfully with some topic of general
interest. After the paper came a debate, and in this debate Mr. Bast
also figured, appearing now as a bright spot in civilisation, now as a
dark spot, according to the temperament of the speaker. The subject of
the paper had been, “How ought I to dispose of my money?” the reader
professing to be a millionaire on the point of death, inclined to
bequeath her fortune for the foundation of local art galleries, but open
to conviction from other sources. The various parts had been assigned
beforehand, and some of the speeches were amusing. The hostess assumed
the ungrateful role of “the millionaire’s eldest son,” and implored her
expiring parent not to dislocate Society by allowing such vast sums
to pass out of the family. Money was the fruit of self-denial, and the
second generation had a right to profit by the self-denial of the first.
What right had “Mr. Bast” to profit? The National Gallery was good
enough for the likes of him. After property had had its say--a saying
that is necessarily ungracious--the various philanthropists stepped
forward. Something must be done for “Mr. Bast”; his conditions must
be improved without impairing his independence; he must have a free
library, or free tennis-courts; his rent must be paid in such a way that
he did not know it was being paid; it must be made worth his while to
join the Territorials; he must be forcibly parted from his uninspiring
wife, the money going to her as compensation; he must be assigned a
Twin Star, some member of the leisured classes who would watch over him
ceaselessly (groans from Helen); he must be given food but no clothes,
clothes but no food, a third-return ticket to Venice, without either
food or clothes when he arrived there. In short, he might be given
anything and everything so long as it was not the money itself.

And here Margaret interrupted.

“Order, order, Miss Schlegel!” said the reader of the paper. “You are
here, I understand, to advise me in the interests of the Society for the
Preservation of Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty. I cannot
have you speaking out of your role. It makes my poor head go round, and
I think you forget that I am very ill.”

“Your head won’t go round if only you’ll listen to my argument,” said
Margaret. “Why not give him the money itself? You’re supposed to have
about thirty thousand a year.”

“Have I? I thought I had a million.”

“Wasn’t a million your capital? Dear me! we ought to have settled that.
Still, it doesn’t matter. Whatever you’ve got, I order you to give as
many poor men as you can three hundred a year each.”

“But that would be pauperising them,” said an earnest girl, who liked
the Schlegels, but thought them a little unspiritual at times.

“Not if you gave them so much. A big windfall would not pauperise a man.
It is these little driblets, distributed among too many, that do the
harm. Money’s educational. It’s far more educational than the things
it buys.” There was a protest. “In a sense,” added Margaret, but the
protest continued. “Well, isn’t the most civilized thing going, the man
who has learnt to wear his income properly?”

“Exactly what your Mr. Basts won’t do.”

“Give them a chance. Give them money. Don’t dole them out poetry-books
and railway-tickets like babies. Give them the wherewithal to buy these
things. When your Socialism comes it may be different, and we may think
in terms of commodities instead of cash. Till it comes give people
cash, for it is the warp of civilisation, whatever the woof may be. The
imagination ought to play upon money and realise it vividly, for it’s
the--the second most important thing in the world. It is so slurred over
and hushed up, there is so little clear thinking--oh, political economy,
of course, but so few of us think clearly about our own private incomes,
and admit that independent thoughts are in nine cases out of ten the
result of independent means. Money: give Mr. Bast money, and don’t
bother about his ideals. He’ll pick up those for himself.”

She leant back while the more earnest members of the club began to
misconstrue her. The female mind, though cruelly practical in daily
life, cannot bear to hear ideals belittled in conversation, and Miss
Schlegel was asked however she could say such dreadful things, and what
it would profit Mr. Bast if he gained the whole world and lost his own
soul. She answered, “Nothing, but he would not gain his soul until
he had gained a little of the world.” Then they said, “No, we do not
believe it,” and she admitted that an overworked clerk may save his soul
in the superterrestrial sense, where the effort will be taken for the
deed, but she denied that he will ever explore the spiritual resources
of this world, will ever know the rarer joys of the body, or attain to
clear and passionate intercourse with his fellows. Others had attacked
the fabric of Society--Property, Interest, etc.; she only fixed her eyes
on a few human beings, to see how, under present conditions, they could
be made happier. Doing good to humanity was useless: the many-coloured
efforts thereto spreading over the vast area like films and resulting in
an universal grey. To do good to one, or, as in this case, to a few, was
the utmost she dare hope for.

Between the idealists, and the political economists, Margaret had a
bad time. Disagreeing elsewhere, they agreed in disowning her, and
in keeping the administration of the millionaire’s money in their
own hands. The earnest girl brought forward a scheme of “personal
supervision and mutual help,” the effect of which was to alter poor
people until they became exactly like people who were not so poor. The
hostess pertinently remarked that she, as eldest son, might surely rank
among the millionaire’s legatees. Margaret weakly admitted the claim,
and another claim was at once set up by Helen, who declared that she
had been the millionaire’s housemaid for over forty years, overfed and
underpaid; was nothing to be done for her, so corpulent and poor? The
millionaire then read out her last will and testament, in which she left
the whole of her fortune to the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Then she
died. The serious parts of the discussion had been of higher merit than
the playful--in a men’s debate is the reverse more general?--but the
meeting broke up hilariously enough, and a dozen happy ladies dispersed
to their homes.

Helen and Margaret walked with the earnest girl as far as Battersea
Bridge Station, arguing copiously all the way. When she had gone
they were conscious of an alleviation, and of the great beauty of the
evening. They turned back towards Oakley Street. The lamps and the
plane-trees, following the line of the embankment, struck a note of
dignity that is rare in English cities. The seats, almost deserted, were
here and there occupied by gentlefolk in evening dress, who had strolled
out from the houses behind to enjoy fresh air and the whisper of the
rising tide. There is something continental about Chelsea Embankment. It
is an open space used rightly, a blessing more frequent in Germany than
here. As Margaret and Helen sat down, the city behind them seemed to
be a vast theatre, an opera-house in which some endless trilogy was
performing, and they themselves a pair of satisfied subscribers, who did
not mind losing a little of the second act.

“Cold?”

“No.”

“Tired?”

“Doesn’t matter.”

The earnest girl’s train rumbled away over the bridge.

“I say, Helen--”

“Well?”

“Are we really going to follow up Mr. Bast?”

“I don’t know.”

“I think we won’t.”

“As you like.”

“It’s no good, I think, unless you really mean to know people. The
discussion brought that home to me. We got on well enough with him in a
spirit of excitement, but think of rational intercourse. We mustn’t play
at friendship. No, it’s no good.”

“There’s Mrs. Lanoline, too,” Helen yawned. “So dull.”

“Just so, and possibly worse than dull.”

“I should like to know how he got hold of your card.”

“But he said--something about a concert and an umbrella.”

“Then did the card see the wife--”

“Helen, come to bed.”

“No, just a little longer, it is so beautiful. Tell me; oh yes; did you
say money is the warp of the world?”

“Yes.”

“Then what’s the woof?”

“Very much what one chooses,” said Margaret. “It’s something that isn’t
money--one can’t say more.”

“Walking at night?”

“Probably.”

“For Tibby, Oxford?”

“It seems so.”

“For you?”

“Now that we have to leave Wickham Place, I begin to think it’s that.
For Mrs. Wilcox it was certainly Howards End.”

One’s own name will carry immense distances. Mr. Wilcox, who was sitting
with friends many seats away, heard this, rose to his feet, and strolled
along towards the speakers.

“It is sad to suppose that places may ever be more important than
people,” continued Margaret.

“Why, Meg? They’re so much nicer generally. I’d rather think of that
forester’s house in Pomerania than of the fat Herr Forstmeister who
lived in it.”

“I believe we shall come to care about people less and less, Helen. The
more people one knows the easier it becomes to replace them. It’s one
of the curses of London. I quite expect to end my life caring most for a
place.”

Here Mr. Wilcox reached them. It was several weeks since they had met.

“How do you do?” he cried. “I thought I recognised your voices. Whatever
are you both doing down here?”

His tones were protective. He implied that one ought not to sit out
on Chelsea Embankment without a male escort. Helen resented this, but
Margaret accepted it as part of the good man’s equipment.

“What an age it is since I’ve seen you, Mr. Wilcox. I met Evie in the
Tube, though, lately. I hope you have good news of your son.”

“Paul?” said Mr. Wilcox, extinguishing his cigarette, and sitting down
between them. “Oh, Paul’s all right. We had a line from Madeira. He’ll
be at work again by now.”

“Ugh--” said Helen, shuddering from complex causes.

“I beg your pardon?”

“Isn’t the climate of Nigeria too horrible?”

“Some one’s got to go,” he said simply. “England will never keep her
trade overseas unless she is prepared to make sacrifices. Unless we get
firm in West Africa, Ger--untold complications may follow. Now tell me
all your news.”

“Oh, we’ve had a splendid evening,” cried Helen, who always woke up at
the advent of a visitor. “We belong to a kind of club that reads papers,
Margaret and I--all women, but there is a discussion after. This evening
it was on how one ought to leave one’s money--whether to one’s family,
or to the poor, and if so how--oh, most interesting.”

The man of business smiled. Since his wife’s death he had almost doubled
his income. He was an important figure at last, a reassuring name on
company prospectuses, and life had treated him very well. The world
seemed in his grasp as he listened to the River Thames, which still
flowed inland from the sea. So wonderful to the girls, it held no
mysteries for him. He had helped to shorten its long tidal trough by
taking shares in the lock at Teddington, and if he and other capitalists
thought good, some day it could be shortened again. With a good dinner
inside him and an amiable but academic woman on either flank, he felt
that his hands were on all the ropes of life, and that what he did not
know could not be worth knowing.

“Sounds a most original entertainment!” he exclaimed, and laughed in
his pleasant way. “I wish Evie would go to that sort of thing. But she
hasn’t the time. She’s taken to breeding Aberdeen terriers--jolly little
dogs.”

“I expect we’d better be doing the same, really.”

“We pretend we’re improving ourselves, you see,” said Helen a little
sharply, for the Wilcox glamour is not of the kind that returns, and she
had bitter memories of the days when a speech such as he had just made
would have impressed her favourably. “We suppose it a good thing to
waste an evening once a fortnight over a debate, but, as my sister says,
it may be better to breed dogs.”

“Not at all. I don’t agree with your sister. There’s nothing like a
debate to teach one quickness. I often wish I had gone in for them when
I was a youngster. It would have helped me no end.”

“Quickness--?”

“Yes. Quickness in argument. Time after time I’ve missed scoring a point
because the other man has had the gift of the gab and I haven’t. Oh, I
believe in these discussions.”

The patronising tone, thought Margaret, came well enough from a man who
was old enough to be their father. She had always maintained that Mr.
Wilcox had a charm. In times of sorrow or emotion his inadequacy had
pained her, but it was pleasant to listen to him now, and to watch his
thick brown moustache and high forehead confronting the stars. But Helen
was nettled. The aim of their debates she implied was Truth.

“Oh yes, it doesn’t much matter what subject you take,” said he.

Margaret laughed and said, “But this is going to be far better than the
debate itself.” Helen recovered herself and laughed too. “No, I won’t go
on,” she declared. “I’ll just put our special case to Mr. Wilcox.”

“About Mr. Bast? Yes, do. He’ll be more lenient to a special case.”

“But, Mr. Wilcox, do first light another cigarette. It’s this. We’ve
just come across a young fellow, who’s evidently very poor, and who
seems interest--”

“What’s his profession?”

“Clerk.”

“What in?”

“Do you remember, Margaret?”

“Porphyrion Fire Insurance Company.”

“Oh yes; the nice people who gave Aunt Juley a new hearth rug. He seems
interesting, in some ways very, and one wishes one could help him. He is
married to a wife whom he doesn’t seem to care for much. He likes books,
and what one may roughly call adventure, and if he had a chance--But he
is so poor. He lives a life where all the money is apt to go on nonsense
and clothes. One is so afraid that circumstances will be too strong
for him and that he will sink. Well, he got mixed up in our debate. He
wasn’t the subject of it, but it seemed to bear on his point. Suppose
a millionaire died, and desired to leave money to help such a man. How
should he be helped? Should he be given three hundred pounds a year
direct, which was Margaret’s plan? Most of them thought this would
pauperise him. Should he and those like him be given free libraries?
I said ‘No!’ He doesn’t want more books to read, but to read books
rightly. My suggestion was he should be given something every year
towards a summer holiday, but then there is his wife, and they said she
would have to go too. Nothing seemed quite right! Now what do you think?
Imagine that you were a millionaire, and wanted to help the poor. What
would you do?”

Mr. Wilcox, whose fortune was not so very far below the standard
indicated, laughed exuberantly. “My dear Miss Schlegel, I will not rush
in where your sex has been unable to tread. I will not add another plan
to the numerous excellent ones that have been already suggested. My only
contribution is this: let your young friend clear out of the Porphyrion
Fire Insurance Company with all possible speed.”

“Why?” said Margaret.

He lowered his voice. “This is between friends. It’ll be in the
Receiver’s hands before Christmas. It’ll smash,” he added, thinking that
she had not understood.

“Dear me, Helen, listen to that. And he’ll have to get another place!”

“WILL have? Let him leave the ship before it sinks. Let him get one
now.”

“Rather than wait, to make sure?”

“Decidedly.”

“Why’s that?”

Again the Olympian laugh, and the lowered voice. “Naturally the man
who’s in a situation when he applies stands a better chance, is in a
stronger position, that the man who isn’t. It looks as if he’s worth
something. I know by myself--(this is letting you into the State
secrets)--it affects an employer greatly. Human nature, I’m afraid.”

“I hadn’t thought of that,” murmured Margaret, while Helen said, “Our
human nature appears to be the other way round. We employ people because
they’re unemployed. The boot man, for instance.”

“And how does he clean the boots?”

“Not well,” confessed Margaret.

“There you are!”

“Then do you really advise us to tell this youth--?”

“I advise nothing,” he interrupted, glancing up and down the Embankment,
in case his indiscretion had been overheard. “I oughtn’t to have
spoken--but I happen to know, being more or less behind the scenes. The
Porphyrion’s a bad, bad concern--Now, don’t say I said so. It’s outside
the Tariff Ring.”

“Certainly I won’t say. In fact, I don’t know what that means.”

“I thought an insurance company never smashed,” was Helen’s
contribution. “Don’t the others always run in and save them?”

“You’re thinking of reinsurance,” said Mr. Wilcox mildly. “It is exactly
there that the Porphyrion is weak. It has tried to undercut, has been
badly hit by a long series of small fires, and it hasn’t been able to
reinsure. I’m afraid that public companies don’t save one another for
love.”

“‘Human nature,’ I suppose,” quoted Helen, and he laughed and agreed
that it was. When Margaret said that she supposed that clerks, like
every one else, found it extremely difficult to get situations in these
days, he replied, “Yes, extremely,” and rose to rejoin his friends. He
knew by his own office--seldom a vacant post, and hundreds of applicants
for it; at present no vacant post.

“And how’s Howards End looking?” said Margaret, wishing to change the
subject before they parted. Mr. Wilcox was a little apt to think one
wanted to get something out of him.

“It’s let.”

“Really. And you wandering homeless in longhaired Chelsea? How strange
are the ways of Fate!”

“No; it’s let unfurnished. We’ve moved.”

“Why, I thought of you both as anchored there for ever. Evie never told
me.”

“I dare say when you met Evie the thing wasn’t settled. We only moved
a week ago. Paul has rather a feeling for the old place, and we held on
for him to have his holiday there; but, really, it is impossibly small.
Endless drawbacks. I forget whether you’ve been up to it?”

“As far as the house, never.”

“Well, Howards End is one of those converted farms. They don’t really
do, spend what you will on them. We messed away with a garage all among
the wych-elm roots, and last year we enclosed a bit of the meadow and
attempted a rockery. Evie got rather keen on Alpine plants. But it
didn’t do--no, it didn’t do. You remember, your sister will remember,
the farm with those abominable guinea-fowls, and the hedge that the old
woman never would cut properly, so that it all went thin at the
bottom. And, inside the house, the beams--and the staircase through a
door--picturesque enough, but not a place to live in.” He glanced
over the parapet cheerfully. “Full tide. And the position wasn’t right
either. The neighbourhood’s getting suburban. Either be in London or out
of it, I say; so we’ve taken a house in Ducie Street, close to Sloane
Street, and a place right down in Shropshire--Oniton Grange. Ever heard
of Oniton? Do come and see us--right away from everywhere, up towards
Wales.”

“What a change!” said Margaret. But the change was in her own voice,
which had become most sad. “I can’t imagine Howards End or Hilton
without you.”

“Hilton isn’t without us,” he replied. “Charles is there still.”

“Still?” said Margaret, who had not kept up with the Charles’s. “But I
thought he was still at Epsom. They were furnishing that Christmas--one
Christmas. How everything alters! I used to admire Mrs. Charles from our
windows very often. Wasn’t it Epsom?”

“Yes, but they moved eighteen months ago. Charles, the good chap”--his
voice dropped--“thought I should be lonely. I didn’t want him to move,
but he would, and took a house at the other end of Hilton, down by
the Six Hills. He had a motor, too. There they all are, a very jolly
party--he and she and the two grandchildren.”

“I manage other people’s affairs so much better than they manage them
themselves,” said Margaret as they shook hands. “When you moved out of
Howards End, I should have moved Mr. Charles Wilcox into it. I should
have kept so remarkable a place in the family.”

“So it is,” he replied. “I haven’t sold it, and don’t mean to.”

“No; but none of you are there.”

“Oh, we’ve got a splendid tenant--Hamar Bryce, an invalid. If
Charles ever wanted it--but he won’t. Dolly is so dependent on modern
conveniences. No, we have all decided against Howards End. We like it in
a way, but now we feel that it is neither one thing nor the other. One
must have one thing or the other.”

“And some people are lucky enough to have both. You’re doing yourself
proud, Mr. Wilcox. My congratulations.”

“And mine,” said Helen.

“Do remind Evie to come and see us--2 Wickham Place. We shan’t be there
very long, either.”

“You, too, on the move?”

“Next September,” Margaret sighed.

“Every one moving! Good-bye.”

The tide had begun to ebb. Margaret leant over the parapet and watched
it sadly. Mr. Wilcox had forgotten his wife, Helen her lover; she
herself was probably forgetting. Every one moving. Is it worth while
attempting the past when there is this continual flux even in the hearts
of men?

Helen roused her by saying: “What a prosperous vulgarian Mr. Wilcox has
grown! I have very little use for him in these days. However, he did
tell us about the Porphyrion. Let us write to Mr. Bast as soon as ever
we get home, and tell him to clear out of it at once.”

“Do; yes, that’s worth doing. Let us.”



CHAPTER XVI

Leonard accepted the invitation to tea next Saturday. But he was right;
the visit proved a conspicuous failure.

“Sugar?” said Margaret.

“Cake?” said Helen. “The big cake or the little deadlies? I’m afraid
you thought my letter rather odd, but we’ll explain--we aren’t odd,
really--nor affected, really. We’re over-expressive--that’s all.”

As a lady’s lap-dog Leonard did not excel. He was not an Italian,
still less a Frenchman, in whose blood there runs the very spirit of
persiflage and of gracious repartee. His wit was the Cockney’s; it
opened no doors into imagination, and Helen was drawn up short by “The
more a lady has to say, the better,” administered waggishly.

“Oh yes,” she said.

“Ladies brighten--”

“Yes, I know. The darlings are regular sunbeams. Let me give you a
plate.”

“How do you like your work?” interposed Margaret.

He, too, was drawn up short. He would not have these women prying into
his work. They were Romance, and so was the room to which he had at last
penetrated, with the queer sketches of people bathing upon its walls,
and so were the very tea-cups, with their delicate borders of wild
strawberries. But he would not let romance interfere with his life.
There is the devil to pay then.

“Oh, well enough,” he answered.

“Your company is the Porphyrion, isn’t it?”

“Yes, that’s so.”--becoming rather offended. “It’s funny how things get
round.”

“Why funny?” asked Helen, who did not follow the workings of his mind.
“It was written as large as life on your card, and considering we wrote
to you there, and that you replied on the stamped paper--”

“Would you call the Porphyrion one of the big Insurance Companies?”
 pursued Margaret.

“It depends on what you call big.”

“I mean by big, a solid, well-established concern, that offers a
reasonably good career to its employes.”

“I couldn’t say--some would tell you one thing and others another,” said
the employee uneasily. “For my own part”--he shook his head--“I only
believe half I hear. Not that even; it’s safer. Those clever ones come
to the worse grief, I’ve often noticed. Ah, you can’t be too careful.”

He drank, and wiped his moustache, which was going to be one of those
moustaches that always droop into tea-cups--more bother than they’re
worth, surely, and not fashionable either.

“I quite agree, and that’s why I was curious to know; is it a solid,
well-established concern?”

Leonard had no idea. He understood his own corner of the machine,
but nothing beyond it. He desired to confess neither knowledge nor
ignorance, and under these circumstances, another motion of the head
seemed safest. To him, as to the British public, the Porphyrion was the
Porphyrion of the advertisement--a giant, in the classical style, but
draped sufficiently, who held in one hand a burning torch, and pointed
with the other to St. Paul’s and Windsor Castle. A large sum of money
was inscribed below, and you drew your own conclusions. This giant
caused Leonard to do arithmetic and write letters, to explain the
regulations to new clients, and re-explain them to old ones. A giant
was of an impulsive morality--one knew that much. He would pay for
Mrs. Munt’s hearthrug with ostentatious haste, a large claim he would
repudiate quietly, and fight court by court. But his true fighting
weight, his antecedents, his amours with other members of the commercial
Pantheon--all these were as uncertain to ordinary mortals as were the
escapades of Zeus. While the gods are powerful, we learn little about
them. It is only in the days of their decadence that a strong light
beats into heaven.

“We were told the Porphyrion’s no go,” blurted Helen. “We wanted to tell
you; that’s why we wrote.”

“A friend of ours did think that it is insufficiently reinsured,” said
Margaret.

Now Leonard had his clue.

He must praise the Porphyrion. “You can tell your friend,” he said,
“that he’s quite wrong.”

“Oh, good!”

The young man coloured a little. In his circle to be wrong was fatal.
The Miss Schlegels did not mind being wrong. They were genuinely glad
that they had been misinformed. To them nothing was fatal but evil.

“Wrong, so to speak,” he added.

“How ‘so to speak’?”

“I mean I wouldn’t say he’s right altogether.”

But this was a blunder. “Then he is right partly,” said the elder woman,
quick as lightning.

Leonard replied that every one was right partly, if it came to that.

“Mr. Bast, I don’t understand business, and I dare say my questions are
stupid, but can you tell me what makes a concern ‘right’ or ‘wrong’?”

Leonard sat back with a sigh.

“Our friend, who is also a business man, was so positive. He said before
Christmas--”

“And advised you to clear out of it,” concluded Helen. “But I don’t see
why he should know better than you do.”

Leonard rubbed his hands. He was tempted to say that he knew nothing
about the thing at all. But a commercial training was too strong for
him. Nor could he say it was a bad thing, for this would be giving
it away; nor yet that it was good, for this would be giving it away
equally. He attempted to suggest that it was something between the two,
with vast possibilities in either direction, but broke down under the
gaze of four sincere eyes. And yet he scarcely distinguished between
the two sisters. One was more beautiful and more lively, but “the Miss
Schlegels” still remained a composite Indian god, whose waving arms and
contradictory speeches were the product of a single mind.

“One can but see,” he remarked, adding, “as Ibsen says, ‘things
happen.’” He was itching to talk about books and make the most of his
romantic hour. Minute after minute slipped away, while the ladies, with
imperfect skill, discussed the subject of reinsurance or praised their
anonymous friend. Leonard grew annoyed--perhaps rightly. He made vague
remarks about not being one of those who minded their affairs being
talked over by others, but they did not take the hint. Men might have
shown more tact. Women, however tactful elsewhere, are heavy-handed
here. They cannot see why we should shroud our incomes and our prospects
in a veil. “How much exactly have you, and how much do you expect to
have next June?” And these were women with a theory, who held that
reticence about money matters is absurd, and that life would be truer
if each would state the exact size of the golden island upon which he
stands, the exact stretch of warp over which he throws the woof that is
not money. How can we do justice to the pattern otherwise?

And the precious minutes slipped away, and Jacky and squalor came
nearer. At last he could bear it no longer, and broke in, reciting
the names of books feverishly. There was a moment of piercing joy when
Margaret said, “So YOU like Carlyle” and then the door opened, and “Mr.
Wilcox, Miss Wilcox” entered, preceded by two prancing puppies.

“Oh, the dears! Oh, Evie, how too impossibly sweet!” screamed Helen,
falling on her hands and knees.

“We brought the little fellows round,” said Mr. Wilcox.

“I bred ’em myself.”

“Oh, really! Mr. Bast, come and play with puppies.”

“I’ve got to be going now,” said Leonard sourly.

“But play with puppies a little first.”

“This is Ahab, that’s Jezebel,” said Evie, who was one of those who name
animals after the less successful characters of Old Testament history.

“I’ve got to be going.”

Helen was too much occupied with puppies to notice him.

“Mr. Wilcox, Mr. Ba--Must you be really? Good-bye!”

“Come again,” said Helen from the floor.

Then Leonard’s gorge arose. Why should he come again? What was the good
of it? He said roundly: “No, I shan’t; I knew it would be a failure.”

Most people would have let him go. “A little mistake. We tried knowing
another class--impossible.”

But the Schlegels had never played with life. They had attempted
friendship, and they would take the consequences. Helen retorted, “I
call that a very rude remark. What do you want to turn on me like that
for?” and suddenly the drawing-room re-echoed to a vulgar row.

“You ask me why I turn on you?”

“Yes.”

“What do you want to have me here for?’

“To help you, you silly boy!” cried Helen. “And don’t shout.”

“I don’t want your patronage. I don’t want your tea. I was quite happy.
What do you want to unsettle me for?” He turned to Mr. Wilcox. “I put it
to this gentleman. I ask you, sir, am I to have my brain picked?”

Mr. Wilcox turned to Margaret with the air of humorous strength that he
could so well command. “Are we intruding, Miss Schlegel? Can we be of
any use, or shall we go?”

But Margaret ignored him.

“I’m connected with a leading insurance company, sir. I receive what I
take to be an invitation from these--ladies” (he drawled the word). “I
come, and it’s to have my brain picked. I ask you, is it fair?”

“Highly unfair,” said Mr. Wilcox, drawing a gasp from Evie, who knew
that her father was becoming dangerous.

“There, you hear that? Most unfair, the gentleman says. There! Not
content with”--pointing at Margaret--“you can’t deny it.” His voice
rose; he was falling into the rhythm of a scene with Jacky. “But as
soon as I’m useful it’s a very different thing. ‘Oh yes, send for him.
Cross-question him. Pick his brains.’ Oh yes. Now, take me on the whole,
I’m a quiet fellow: I’m law-abiding, I don’t wish any unpleasantness;
but I--I--”

“You,” said Margaret--“you--you--”

Laughter from Evie as at a repartee.

“You are the man who tried to walk by the Pole Star.”

More laughter.

“You saw the sunrise.”

Laughter.

“You tried to get away from the fogs that are stifling us all--away past
books and houses to the truth. You were looking for a real home.”

“I fail to see the connection,” said Leonard, hot with stupid anger.

“So do I.” There was a pause. “You were that last Sunday--you are this
to-day. Mr. Bast! I and my sister have talked you over. We wanted to
help you; we also supposed you might help us. We did not have you here
out of charity--which bores us--but because we hoped there would be a
connection between last Sunday and other days. What is the good of your
stars and trees, your sunrise and the wind, if they do not enter into
our daily lives? They have never entered into mine, but into yours,
we thought--Haven’t we all to struggle against life’s daily greyness,
against pettiness, against mechanical cheerfulness, against suspicion?
I struggle by remembering my friends; others I have known by remembering
some place--some beloved place or tree--we thought you one of these.”

“Of course, if there’s been any misunderstanding,” mumbled Leonard, “all
I can do is to go. But I beg to state--” He paused. Ahab and Jezebel
danced at his boots and made him look ridiculous. “You were picking my
brain for official information--I can prove it--I--” He blew his nose
and left them.

“Can I help you now?” said Mr. Wilcox, turning to Margaret. “May I have
one quiet word with him in the hall?”

“Helen, go after him--do anything--anything--to make the noodle
understand.”

Helen hesitated.

“But really--” said their visitor. “Ought she to?”

At once she went.

He resumed. “I would have chimed in, but I felt that you could polish
him off for yourselves--I didn’t interfere. You were splendid, Miss
Schlegel--absolutely splendid. You can take my word for it, but there
are very few women who could have managed him.”

“Oh yes,” said Margaret distractedly.

“Bowling him over with those long sentences was what fetched me,” cried
Evie.

“Yes, indeed,” chuckled her father; “all that part about ‘mechanical
cheerfulness’--oh, fine!”

“I’m very sorry,” said Margaret, collecting herself. “He’s a nice
creature really. I cannot think what set him off. It has been most
unpleasant for you.”

“Oh, I didn’t mind.” Then he changed his mood. He asked if he might
speak as an old friend, and, permission given, said: “Oughtn’t you
really to be more careful?”

Margaret laughed, though her thoughts still strayed after Helen. “Do you
realise that it’s all your fault?” she said. “You’re responsible.”

“I?”

“This is the young man whom we were to warn against the Porphyrion. We
warn him, and--look!”

Mr. Wilcox was annoyed. “I hardly consider that a fair deduction,” he
said.

“Obviously unfair,” said Margaret. “I was only thinking how tangled
things are. It’s our fault mostly--neither yours nor his.”

“Not his?”

“No.”

“Miss Schlegel, you are too kind.”

“Yes, indeed,” nodded Evie, a little contemptuously.

“You behave much too well to people, and then they impose on you. I know
the world and that type of man, and as soon as I entered the room I saw
you had not been treating him properly. You must keep that type at a
distance. Otherwise they forget themselves. Sad, but true. They aren’t
our sort, and one must face the fact.”

“Ye--es.”

“Do admit that we should never have had the outburst if he was a
gentleman.”

“I admit it willingly,” said Margaret, who was pacing up and down the
room. “A gentleman would have kept his suspicions to himself.”

Mr. Wilcox watched her with a vague uneasiness.

“What did he suspect you of?”

“Of wanting to make money out of him.”

“Intolerable brute! But how were you to benefit?”

“Exactly. How indeed! Just horrible, corroding suspicion. One touch of
thought or of goodwill would have brushed it away. Just the senseless
fear that does make men intolerable brutes.”

“I come back to my original point. You ought to be more careful, Miss
Schlegel. Your servants ought to have orders not to let such people in.”

She turned to him frankly. “Let me explain exactly why we like this man,
and want to see him again.”

“That’s your clever way of talking. I shall never believe you like him.”

“I do. Firstly, because he cares for physical adventure, just as you
do. Yes, you go motoring and shooting; he would like to go camping out.
Secondly, he cares for something special IN adventure. It is quickest to
call that special something poetry--”

“Oh, he’s one of that writer sort.”

“No--oh no! I mean he may be, but it would be loathsome stuff. His brain
is filled with the husks of books, culture--horrible; we want him to
wash out his brain and go to the real thing. We want to show him how
he may get upsides with life. As I said, either friends or the country,
some”--she hesitated--“either some very dear person or some very dear
place seems necessary to relieve life’s daily grey, and to show that it
is grey. If possible, one should have both.”

Some of her words ran past Mr. Wilcox. He let them run past. Others he
caught and criticised with admirable lucidity.

“Your mistake is this, and it is a very common mistake. This young
bounder has a life of his own. What right have you to conclude it is an
unsuccessful life, or, as you call it, ‘grey’?”

“Because--”

“One minute. You know nothing about him. He probably has his own
joys and interests--wife, children, snug little home. That’s where we
practical fellows” he smiled--“are more tolerant than you intellectuals.
We live and let live, and assume that things are jogging on fairly well
elsewhere, and that the ordinary plain man may be trusted to look after
his own affairs. I quite grant--I look at the faces of the clerks in my
own office, and observe them to be dull, but I don’t know what’s going
on beneath. So, by the way, with London. I have heard you rail against
London, Miss Schlegel, and it seems a funny thing to say but I was very
angry with you. What do you know about London? You only see civilisation
from the outside. I don’t say in your case, but in too many cases that
attitude leads to morbidity, discontent, and Socialism.”

She admitted the strength of his position, though it undermined
imagination. As he spoke, some outposts of poetry and perhaps of
sympathy fell ruining, and she retreated to what she called her “second
line”--to the special facts of the case.

“His wife is an old bore,” she said simply. “He never came home last
Saturday night because he wanted to be alone, and she thought he was
with us.”

“With YOU?”

“Yes.” Evie tittered. “He hasn’t got the cosy home that you assumed. He
needs outside interests.”

“Naughty young man!” cried the girl.

“Naughty?” said Margaret, who hated naughtiness more than sin. “When
you’re married Miss Wilcox, won’t you want outside interests?”

“He has apparently got them,” put in Mr. Wilcox slyly.

“Yes, indeed, father.”

“He was tramping in Surrey, if you mean that,” said Margaret, pacing
away rather crossly.

“Oh, I dare say!”

“Miss Wilcox, he was!”

“M--m--m--m!” from Mr. Wilcox, who thought the episode amusing, if
risque. With most ladies he would not have discussed it, but he was
trading on Margaret’s reputation as an emancipated woman.

“He said so, and about such a thing he wouldn’t lie.”

They both began to laugh.

“That’s where I differ from you. Men lie about their positions and
prospects, but not about a thing of that sort.”

He shook his head. “Miss Schlegel, excuse me, but I know the type.”

“I said before--he isn’t a type. He cares about adventures rightly. He’s
certain that our smug existence isn’t all. He’s vulgar and hysterical
and bookish, but don’t think that sums him up. There’s manhood in him as
well. Yes, that’s what I’m trying to say. He’s a real man.”

As she spoke their eyes met, and it was as if Mr. Wilcox’s defences
fell. She saw back to the real man in him. Unwittingly she had touched
his emotions.

A woman and two men--they had formed the magic triangle of sex, and
the male was thrilled to jealousy, in case the female was attracted by
another male. Love, say the ascetics, reveals our shameful kinship with
the beasts. Be it so: one can bear that; jealousy is the real shame. It
is jealousy, not love, that connects us with the farmyard intolerably,
and calls up visions of two angry cocks and a complacent hen. Margaret
crushed complacency down because she was civilised. Mr. Wilcox,
uncivilised, continued to feel anger long after he had rebuilt his
defences, and was again presenting a bastion to the world.

“Miss Schlegel, you’re a pair of dear creatures, but you really MUST be
careful in this uncharitable world. What does your brother say?”

“I forget.”

“Surely he has some opinion?”

“He laughs, if I remember correctly.”

“He’s very clever, isn’t he?” said Evie, who had met and detested Tibby
at Oxford.

“Yes, pretty well--but I wonder what Helen’s doing.”

“She is very young to undertake this sort of thing,” said Mr. Wilcox.

Margaret went out to the landing. She heard no sound, and Mr. Bast’s
topper was missing from the hall.

“Helen!” she called.

“Yes!” replied a voice from the library.

“You in there?”

“Yes--he’s gone some time.”

Margaret went to her. “Why, you’re all alone,” she said.

“Yes--it’s all right, Meg. Poor, poor creature--”

“Come back to the Wilcoxes and tell me later--Mr. W much concerned, and
slightly titillated.”

“Oh, I’ve no patience with him. I hate him. Poor dear Mr. Bast! he
wanted to talk literature, and we would talk business. Such a muddle of
a man, and yet so worth pulling through. I like him extraordinarily.”

“Well done,” said Margaret, kissing her, “but come into the drawing-room
now, and don’t talk about him to the Wilcoxes. Make light of the whole
thing.”

Helen came and behaved with a cheerfulness that reassured their
visitor--this hen at all events was fancy-free.

“He’s gone with my blessing,” she cried, “and now for puppies.”

As they drove away, Mr. Wilcox said to his daughter:

“I am really concerned at the way those girls go on. They are as clever
as you make ’em, but unpractical--God bless me! One of these days
they’ll go too far. Girls like that oughtn’t to live alone in London.
Until they marry, they ought to have some one to look after them. We
must look in more often--we’re better than no one. You like them, don’t
you, Evie?”

Evie replied: “Helen’s right enough, but I can’t stand the toothy one.
And I shouldn’t have called either of them girls.”

Evie had grown up handsome. Dark-eyed, with the glow of youth under
sunburn, built firmly and firm-lipped, she was the best the Wilcoxes
could do in the way of feminine beauty. For the present, puppies and
her father were the only things she loved, but the net of matrimony was
being prepared for her, and a few days later she was attracted to a Mr.
Percy Cahill, an uncle of Mrs. Charles’s, and he was attracted to her.



CHAPTER XVII

The Age of Property holds bitter moments even for a proprietor. When
a move is imminent, furniture becomes ridiculous, and Margaret now
lay awake at nights wondering where, where on earth they and all
their belongings would be deposited in September next. Chairs, tables,
pictures, books, that had rumbled down to them through the generations,
must rumble forward again like a slide of rubbish to which she longed to
give the final push, and send toppling into the sea. But there were
all their father’s books--they never read them, but they were
their father’s, and must be kept. There was the marble-topped
chiffonier--their mother had set store by it, they could not remember
why. Round every knob and cushion in the house gathered a sentiment
that was at times personal, but more often a faint piety to the dead, a
prolongation of rites that might have ended at the grave.

It was absurd, if you came to think of it; Helen and Tibby came to think
of it; Margaret was too busy with the house-agents. The feudal ownership
of land did bring dignity, whereas the modern ownership of movables
is reducing us again to a nomadic horde. We are reverting to the
civilisation of luggage, and historians of the future will note how the
middle classes accreted possessions without taking root in the earth,
and may find in this the secret of their imaginative poverty. The
Schlegels were certainly the poorer for the loss of Wickham Place. It
had helped to balance their lives, and almost to counsel them. Nor is
their ground-landlord spiritually the richer. He has built flats on
its site, his motor-cars grow swifter, his exposures of Socialism more
trenchant. But he has spilt the precious distillation of the years, and
no chemistry of his can give it back to society again.

Margaret grew depressed; she was anxious to settle on a house before
they left town to pay their annual visit to Mrs. Munt. She enjoyed this
visit, and wanted to have her mind at ease for it. Swanage, though dull,
was stable, and this year she longed more than usual for its fresh air
and for the magnificent downs that guard it on the north. But London
thwarted her; in its atmosphere she could not concentrate. London only
stimulates, it cannot sustain; and Margaret, hurrying over its surface
for a house without knowing what sort of a house she wanted, was paying
for many a thrilling sensation in the past. She could not even break
loose from culture, and her time was wasted by concerts which it would
be a sin to miss, and invitations which it would never do to refuse. At
last she grew desperate; she resolved that she would go nowhere and be
at home to no one until she found a house, and broke the resolution in
half an hour.

Once she had humorously lamented that she had never been to Simpson’s
restaurant in the Strand. Now a note arrived from Miss Wilcox, asking
her to lunch there. Mr Cahill was coming and the three would have such a
jolly chat, and perhaps end up at the Hippodrome. Margaret had no strong
regard for Evie, and no desire to meet her fiance, and she was surprised
that Helen, who had been far funnier about Simpson’s, had not been asked
instead. But the invitation touched her by its intimate tone. She
must know Evie Wilcox better than she supposed, and declaring that she
“simply must,” she accepted.

But when she saw Evie at the entrance of the restaurant, staring
fiercely at nothing after the fashion of athletic women, her heart
failed her anew. Miss Wilcox had changed perceptibly since her
engagement. Her voice was gruffer, her manner more downright, and she
was inclined to patronise the more foolish virgin. Margaret was silly
enough to be pained at this. Depressed at her isolation, she saw not
only houses and furniture, but the vessel of life itself slipping past
her, with people like Evie and Mr. Cahill on board.

There are moments when virtue and wisdom fail us, and one of them came
to her at Simpson’s in the Strand. As she trod the staircase, narrow,
but carpeted thickly, as she entered the eating-room, where saddles of
mutton were being trundled up to expectant clergymen, she had a strong,
if erroneous, conviction of her own futility, and wished she had never
come out of her backwater, where nothing happened except art and
literature, and where no one ever got married or succeeded in
remaining engaged. Then came a little surprise. “Father might be of the
party--yes, father was.” With a smile of pleasure she moved forward to
greet him, and her feeling of loneliness vanished.

“I thought I’d get round if I could,” said he. “Evie told me of her
little plan, so I just slipped in and secured a table. Always secure
a table first. Evie, don’t pretend you want to sit by your old father,
because you don’t. Miss Schlegel, come in my side, out of pity. My
goodness, but you look tired! Been worrying round after your young
clerks?”

“No, after houses,” said Margaret, edging past him into the box. “I’m
hungry, not tired; I want to eat heaps.”

“That’s good. What’ll you have?”

“Fish pie,” said she, with a glance at the menu.

“Fish pie! Fancy coming for fish pie to Simpson’s. It’s not a bit the
thing to go for here.”

“Go for something for me, then,” said Margaret, pulling off her gloves.
Her spirits were rising, and his reference to Leonard Bast had warmed
her curiously.

“Saddle of mutton,” said he after profound reflection; “and cider to
drink. That’s the type of thing. I like this place, for a joke, once in
a way. It is so thoroughly Old English. Don’t you agree?”

“Yes,” said Margaret, who didn’t. The order was given, the joint rolled
up, and the carver, under Mr. Wilcox’s direction, cut the meat where
it was succulent, and piled their plates high. Mr. Cahill insisted on
sirloin, but admitted that he had made a mistake later on. He and
Evie soon fell into a conversation of the “No, I didn’t; yes, you did”
 type--conversation which, though fascinating to those who are engaged in
it, neither desires nor deserves the attention of others.

“It’s a golden rule to tip the carver. Tip everywhere’s my motto.”

“Perhaps it does make life more human.”

“Then the fellows know one again. Especially in the East, if you tip,
they remember you from year’s end to year’s end.”

“Have you been in the East?”

“Oh, Greece and the Levant. I used to go out for sport and business to
Cyprus; some military society of a sort there. A few piastres, properly
distributed, help to keep one’s memory green. But you, of course, think
this shockingly cynical. How’s your discussion society getting on? Any
new Utopias lately?”

“No, I’m house-hunting, Mr. Wilcox, as I’ve already told you once. Do
you know of any houses?”

“Afraid I don’t.”

“Well, what’s the point of being practical if you can’t find two
distressed females a house? We merely want a small house with large
rooms, and plenty of them.”

“Evie, I like that! Miss Schlegel expects me to turn house-agent for
her!”

“What’s that, father?”

“I want a new home in September, and some one must find it. I can’t.”

“Percy, do you know of anything?”

“I can’t say I do,” said Mr. Cahill.

“How like you! You’re never any good.”

“Never any good. Just listen to her! Never any good. Oh, come!”

“Well, you aren’t. Miss Schlegel, is he?”

The torrent of their love, having splashed these drops at Margaret,
swept away on its habitual course. She sympathised with it now, for a
little comfort had restored her geniality. Speech and silence pleased
her equally, and while Mr. Wilcox made some preliminary inquiries about
cheese, her eyes surveyed the restaurant, and aired its well-calculated
tributes to the solidity of our past. Though no more Old English than
the works of Kipling, it had selected its reminiscences so adroitly
that her criticism was lulled, and the guests whom it was nourishing for
imperial purposes bore the outer semblance of Parson Adams or Tom Jones.
Scraps of their talk jarred oddly on the ear. “Right you are! I’ll cable
out to Uganda this evening,” came from the table behind. “Their Emperor
wants war; well, let him have it,” was the opinion of a clergyman. She
smiled at such incongruities. “Next time,” she said to Mr. Wilcox, “you
shall come to lunch with me at Mr. Eustace Miles’s.”

“With pleasure.”

“No, you’d hate it,” she said, pushing her glass towards him for some
more cider. “It’s all proteids and body buildings, and people come up to
you and beg your pardon, but you have such a beautiful aura.”

“A what?”

“Never heard of an aura? Oh, happy, happy man! I scrub at mine for
hours. Nor of an astral plane?”

He had heard of astral planes, and censured them.

“Just so. Luckily it was Helen’s aura, not mine, and she had to
chaperone it and do the politenesses. I just sat with my handkerchief in
my mouth till the man went.”

“Funny experiences seem to come to you two girls. No one’s ever asked me
about my--what d’ye call it? Perhaps I’ve not got one.”

“You’re bound to have one, but it may be such a terrible colour that no
one dares mention it.”

“Tell me, though, Miss Schlegel, do you really believe in the
supernatural and all that?”

“Too difficult a question.”

“Why’s that? Gruyere or Stilton?”

“Gruyere, please.”

“Better have Stilton.

“Stilton. Because, though I don’t believe in auras, and think
Theosophy’s only a halfway-house--”

“--Yet there may be something in it all the same,” he concluded, with a
frown.

“Not even that. It may be halfway in the wrong direction. I can’t
explain. I don’t believe in all these fads, and yet I don’t like saying
that I don’t believe in them.”

He seemed unsatisfied, and said: “So you wouldn’t give me your word that
you DON’T hold with astral bodies and all the rest of it?”

“I could,” said Margaret, surprised that the point was of any importance
to him. “Indeed, I will. When I talked about scrubbing my aura, I was
only trying to be funny. But why do you want this settled?”

“I don’t know.”

“Now, Mr. Wilcox, you do know.”

“Yes, I am,” “No, you’re not,” burst from the lovers opposite. Margaret
was silent for a moment, and then changed the subject.

“How’s your house?”

“Much the same as when you honoured it last week.”

“I don’t mean Ducie Street. Howards End, of course.”

“Why ‘of course’?”

“Can’t you turn out your tenant and let it to us? We’re nearly demented.”

“Let me think. I wish I could help you. But I thought you wanted to be
in town. One bit of advice: fix your district, then fix your price, and
then don’t budge. That’s how I got both Ducie Street and Oniton. I said
to myself, ‘I mean to be exactly here,’ and I was, and Oniton’s a place
in a thousand.”

“But I do budge. Gentlemen seem to mesmerise houses--cow them with an
eye, and up they come, trembling. Ladies can’t. It’s the houses that are
mesmerising me. I’ve no control over the saucy things. Houses are alive.
No?”

“I’m out of my depth,” he said, and added: “Didn’t you talk rather like
that to your office boy?”

“Did I?--I mean I did, more or less. I talk the same way to every
one--or try to.”

“Yes, I know. And how much of it do you suppose he understood?”

“That’s his lookout. I don’t believe in suiting my conversation to my
company. One can doubtless hit upon some medium of exchange that seems
to do well enough, but it’s no more like the real thing than money
is like food. There’s no nourishment in it. You pass it to the lower
classes, and they pass it back to you, and this you call ‘social
intercourse’ or ‘mutual endeavour,’ when it’s mutual priggishness if
it’s anything. Our friends at Chelsea don’t see this. They say one ought
to be at all costs intelligible, and sacrifice--”

“Lower classes,” interrupted Mr. Wilcox, as it were thrusting his hand
into her speech. “Well, you do admit that there are rich and poor.
That’s something.”

Margaret could not reply. Was he incredibly stupid, or did he understand
her better than she understood herself?

“You do admit that, if wealth was divided up equally, in a few years
there would be rich and poor again just the same. The hard-working man
would come to the top, the wastrel sink to the bottom.”

“Every one admits that.”

“Your Socialists don’t.”

“My Socialists do. Yours mayn’t; but I strongly suspect yours of being
not Socialists, but ninepins, which you have constructed for your own
amusement. I can’t imagine any living creature who would bowl over quite
so easily.”

He would have resented this had she not been a woman. But women may say
anything--it was one of his holiest beliefs--and he only retorted, with
a gay smile: “I don’t care. You’ve made two damaging admissions, and I’m
heartily with you in both.”

In time they finished lunch, and Margaret, who had excused herself from
the Hippodrome, took her leave. Evie had scarcely addressed her, and she
suspected that the entertainment had been planned by the father. He
and she were advancing out of their respective families towards a more
intimate acquaintance. It had begun long ago. She had been his wife’s
friend and, as such, he had given her that silver vinaigrette as a
memento. It was pretty of him to have given that vinaigrette, and he had
always preferred her to Helen--unlike most men. But the advance had been
astonishing lately. They had done more in a week than in two years, and
were really beginning to know each other.

She did not forget his promise to sample Eustace Miles, and asked him as
soon as she could secure Tibby as his chaperon. He came, and partook of
body-building dishes with humility.

Next morning the Schlegels left for Swanage. They had not succeeded in
finding a new home.



CHAPTER XVIII

As they were seated at Aunt Juley’s breakfast-table at The Bays,
parrying her excessive hospitality and enjoying the view of the bay, a
letter came for Margaret and threw her into perturbation. It was from
Mr. Wilcox. It announced an “important change” in his plans. Owing to
Evie’s marriage, he had decided to give up his house in Ducie Street,
and was willing to let it on a yearly tenancy. It was a businesslike
letter, and stated frankly what he would do for them and what he would
not do. Also the rent. If they approved, Margaret was to come up AT
ONCE--the words were underlined, as is necessary when dealing with
women--and to go over the house with him. If they disapproved, a wire
would oblige, as he should put it into the hands of an agent.

The letter perturbed, because she was not sure what it meant. If he
liked her, if he had manoeuvred to get her to Simpson’s, might this be a
manoeuvre to get her to London, and result in an offer of marriage?
She put it to herself as indelicately as possible, in the hope that her
brain would cry, “Rubbish, you’re a self-conscious fool!” But her brain
only tingled a little and was silent, and for a time she sat gazing at
the mincing waves, and wondering whether the news would seem strange to
the others.

As soon as she began speaking, the sound of her own voice reassured her.
There could be nothing in it. The replies also were typical, and in the
burr of conversation her fears vanished.

“You needn’t go though--” began her hostess.

“I needn’t, but hadn’t I better? It’s really getting rather serious. We
let chance after chance slip, and the end of it is we shall be bundled
out bag and baggage into the street. We don’t know what we WANT, that’s
the mischief with us--”

“No, we have no real ties,” said Helen, helping herself to toast.

“Shan’t I go up to town to-day, take the house if it’s the least
possible, and then come down by the afternoon train to-morrow, and start
enjoying myself. I shall be no fun to myself or to others until this
business is off my mind.”

“But you won’t do anything rash, Margaret?”

“There’s nothing rash to do.”

“Who ARE the Wilcoxes?” said Tibby, a question that sounds silly, but
was really extremely subtle as his aunt found to her cost when she tried
to answer it. “I don’t MANAGE the Wilcoxes; I don’t see where they come
IN.”

“No more do I,” agreed Helen. “It’s funny that we just don’t lose sight
of them. Out of all our hotel acquaintances, Mr. Wilcox is the only one
who has stuck. It is now over three years, and we have drifted away from
far more interesting people in that time.”

“Interesting people don’t get one houses.”

“Meg, if you start in your honest-English vein, I shall throw the
treacle at you.”

“It’s a better vein than the cosmopolitan,” said Margaret, getting up.
“Now, children, which is it to be? You know the Ducie Street house.
Shall I say yes or shall I say no? Tibby love--which? I’m specially
anxious to pin you both.”

“It all depends on what meaning you attach to the word ‘possible’”

“It depends on nothing of the sort. Say ‘yes.’”

“Say ‘no.’”

Then Margaret spoke rather seriously. “I think,” she said, “that our
race is degenerating. We cannot settle even this little thing; what will
it be like when we have to settle a big one?”

“It will be as easy as eating,” returned Helen.

“I was thinking of father. How could he settle to leave Germany as he
did, when he had fought for it as a young man, and all his feelings
and friends were Prussian? How could he break loose with Patriotism and
begin aiming at something else? It would have killed me. When he was
nearly forty he could change countries and ideals--and we, at our age,
can’t change houses. It’s humiliating.”

“Your father may have been able to change countries,” said Mrs. Munt
with asperity, “and that may or may not be a good thing. But he could
change houses no better than you can, in fact, much worse. Never shall I
forget what poor Emily suffered in the move from Manchester.”

“I knew it,” cried Helen. “I told you so. It is the little things one
bungles at. The big, real ones are nothing when they come.”

“Bungle, my dear! You are too little to recollect--in fact, you weren’t
there. But the furniture was actually in the vans and on the move
before the lease for Wickham Place was signed, and Emily took train with
baby--who was Margaret then--and the smaller luggage for London, without
so much as knowing where her new home would be. Getting away from that
house may be hard, but it is nothing to the misery that we all went
through getting you into it.”

Helen, with her mouth full, cried:

“And that’s the man who beat the Austrians, and the Danes, and the
French, and who beat the Germans that were inside himself. And we’re
like him.”

“Speak for yourself,” said Tibby. “Remember that I am cosmopolitan,
please.”

“Helen may be right.”

“Of course she’s right,” said Helen.

Helen might be right, but she did not go up to London. Margaret did
that. An interrupted holiday is the worst of the minor worries, and one
may be pardoned for feeling morbid when a business letter snatches one
away from the sea and friends. She could not believe that her father had
ever felt the same. Her eyes had been troubling her lately, so that she
could not read in the train and it bored her to look at the landscape,
which she had seen but yesterday. At Southampton she “waved” to Frieda;
Frieda was on her way down to join them at Swanage, and Mrs. Munt had
calculated that their trains would cross. But Frieda was looking the
other way, and Margaret travelled on to town feeling solitary and
old-maidish. How like an old maid to fancy that Mr. Wilcox was
courting her! She had once visited a spinster--poor, silly, and
unattractive--whose mania it was that every man who approached her fell
in love. How Margaret’s heart had bled for the deluded thing! How she
had lectured, reasoned, and in despair acquiesced! “I may have been
deceived by the curate, my dear, but the young fellow who brings the
midday post really is fond of me, and has, as a matter of fact--” It had
always seemed to her the most hideous corner of old age, yet she might
be driven into it herself by the mere pressure of virginity.

Mr. Wilcox met her at Waterloo himself. She felt certain that he was
not the same as usual; for one thing, he took offence at everything she
said.

“This is awfully kind of you,” she began, “but I’m afraid it’s not going
to do. The house has not been built that suits the Schlegel family.”

“What! Have you come up determined not to deal?”

“Not exactly.”

“Not exactly? In that case let’s be starting.”

She lingered to admire the motor, which was new, and a fairer creature
than the vermilion giant that had borne Aunt Juley to her doom three
years before.

“Presumably it’s very beautiful,” she said. “How do you like it, Crane?”

“Come, let’s be starting,” repeated her host. “How on earth did you know
that my chauffeur was called Crane?”

“Why, I know Crane; I’ve been for a drive with Evie once. I know that
you’ve got a parlourmaid called Milton. I know all sorts of things.”

“Evie!” he echoed in injured tones. “You won’t see her. She’s gone out
with Cahill. It’s no fun, I can tell you, being left so much alone. I’ve
got my work all day--indeed, a great deal too much of it--but when I
come home in the evening, I tell you, I can’t stand the house.”

“In my absurd way, I’m lonely too,” Margaret replied. “It’s
heart-breaking to leave one’s old home. I scarcely remember anything
before Wickham Place, and Helen and Tibby were born there. Helen says--”

“You, too, feel lonely?”

“Horribly. Hullo, Parliament’s back!”

Mr. Wilcox glanced at Parliament contemptuously. The more important
ropes of life lay elsewhere. “Yes, they are talking again,” said he.
“But you were going to say--”

“Only some rubbish about furniture. Helen says it alone endures while
men and houses perish, and that in the end the world will be a desert of
chairs and sofas--just imagine it!--rolling through infinity with no one
to sit upon them.”

“Your sister always likes her little joke.”

“She says ‘Yes,’ my brother says `No,’ to Ducie Street. It’s no fun
helping us, Mr. Wilcox, I assure you.”

“You are not as unpractical as you pretend. I shall never believe it.”

Margaret laughed. But she was--quite as unpractical. She could not
concentrate on details. Parliament, the Thames, the irresponsive
chauffeur, would flash into the field of house-hunting, and all demand
some comment or response. It is impossible to see modern life steadily
and see it whole, and she had chosen to see it whole. Mr. Wilcox saw
steadily. He never bothered over the mysterious or the private. The
Thames might run inland from the sea, the chauffeur might conceal all
passion and philosophy beneath his unhealthy skin. They knew their own
business, and he knew his.

Yet she liked being with him. He was not a rebuke, but a stimulus, and
banished morbidity. Some twenty years her senior, he preserved a gift
that she supposed herself to have already lost--not youth’s creative
power, but its self-confidence and optimism. He was so sure that it was
a very pleasant world. His complexion was robust, his hair had receded
but not thinned, the thick moustache and the eyes that Helen had
compared to brandy-balls had an agreeable menace in them, whether they
were turned towards the slums or towards the stars. Some day--in the
millennium--there may be no need for his type. At present, homage is due
to it from those who think themselves superior, and who possibly are.

“At all events you responded to my telegram promptly,” he remarked.

“Oh, even I know a good thing when I see it.”

“I’m glad you don’t despise the goods of this world.”

“Heavens, no! Only idiots and prigs do that.”

“I am glad, very glad,” he repeated, suddenly softening and turning to
her, as if the remark had pleased him. “There is so much cant talked in
would-be intellectual circles. I am glad you don’t share it. Self-denial
is all very well as a means of strengthening the character. But I can’t
stand those people who run down comforts. They have usually some axe to
grind. Can you?”

“Comforts are of two kinds,” said Margaret, who was keeping herself in
hand--“those we can share with others, like fire, weather, or music; and
those we can’t--food, food, for instance. It depends.”

“I mean reasonable comforts, of course. I shouldn’t like to think that
you--” He bent nearer; the sentence died unfinished. Margaret’s head
turned very stupid, and the inside of it seemed to revolve like the
beacon in a lighthouse. He did not kiss her, for the hour was half-past
twelve, and the car was passing by the stables of Buckingham Palace. But
the atmosphere was so charged with emotion that people only seemed to
exist on her account, and she was surprised that Crane did not realise
this, and turn round. Idiot though she might be, surely Mr. Wilcox was
more--how should one put it?--more psychological than usual. Always a
good judge of character for business purposes, he seemed this afternoon
to enlarge his field, and to note qualities outside neatness, obedience,
and decision.

“I want to go over the whole house,” she announced when they arrived.
“As soon as I get back to Swanage, which will be to-morrow afternoon,
I’ll talk it over once more with Helen and Tibby, and wire you ‘yes’ or
‘no.’”

“Right. The dining-room.” And they began their survey.

The dining-room was big, but over-furnished. Chelsea would have moaned
aloud. Mr. Wilcox had eschewed those decorative schemes that wince,
and relent, and refrain, and achieve beauty by sacrificing comfort and
pluck. After so much self-colour and self-denial, Margaret viewed with
relief the sumptuous dado, the frieze, the gilded wall-paper, amid whose
foliage parrots sang. It would never do with her own furniture, but
those heavy chairs, that immense sideboard loaded with presentation
plate, stood up against its pressure like men. The room suggested men,
and Margaret, keen to derive the modern capitalist from the warriors and
hunters of the past, saw it as an ancient guest-hall, where the lord sat
at meat among his thanes. Even the Bible--the Dutch Bible that Charles
had brought back from the Boer War--fell into position. Such a room
admitted loot.

“Now the entrance-hall.”

The entrance-hall was paved.

“Here we fellows smoke.”

We fellows smoked in chairs of maroon leather. It was as if a motor-car
had spawned. “Oh, jolly!” said Margaret, sinking into one of them.

“You do like it?” he said, fixing his eyes on her upturned face, and
surely betraying an almost intimate note. “It’s all rubbish not making
oneself comfortable. Isn’t it?”

“Ye--es. Semi-rubbish. Are those Cruikshanks?”

“Gillrays. Shall we go on upstairs?”

“Does all this furniture come from Howards End?”

“The Howards End furniture has all gone to Oniton.”

“Does--However, I’m concerned with the house, not the furniture. How big
is this smoking-room?”

“Thirty by fifteen. No, wait a minute. Fifteen and a half.”

“Ah, well. Mr. Wilcox, aren’t you ever amused at the solemnity with
which we middle classes approach the subject of houses?”

They proceeded to the drawing-room. Chelsea managed better here. It was
sallow and ineffective. One could visualise the ladies withdrawing
to it, while their lords discussed life’s realities below, to the
accompaniment of cigars. Had Mrs. Wilcox’s drawing-room at Howards End
looked thus? Just as this thought entered Margaret’s brain, Mr. Wilcox
did ask her to be his wife, and the knowledge that she had been right so
overcame her that she nearly fainted.

But the proposal was not to rank among the world’s great love scenes.

“Miss Schlegel”--his voice was firm--“I have had you up on false
pretences. I want to speak about a much more serious matter than a
house.”

Margaret almost answered: “I know--”

“Could you be induced to share my--is it probable--”

“Oh, Mr. Wilcox!” she interrupted, taking hold of the piano and averting
her eyes. “I see, I see. I will write to you afterwards if I may.”

He began to stammer. “Miss Schlegel--Margaret you don’t understand.”

“Oh yes! Indeed, yes!” said Margaret.

“I am asking you to be my wife.”

So deep already was her sympathy, that when he said, “I am asking you
to be my wife,” she made herself give a little start. She must show
surprise if he expected it. An immense joy came over her. It was
indescribable. It had nothing to do with humanity, and most resembled
the all-pervading happiness of fine weather. Fine weather is due to the
sun, but Margaret could think of no central radiance here. She stood in
his drawing-room happy, and longing to give happiness. On leaving him
she realised that the central radiance had been love.

“You aren’t offended, Miss Schlegel?”

“How could I be offended?”

There was a moment’s pause. He was anxious to get rid of her, and she
knew it. She had too much intuition to look at him as he struggled for
possessions that money cannot buy. He desired comradeship and affection,
but he feared them, and she, who had taught herself only to desire, and
could have clothed the struggle with beauty, held back, and hesitated
with him.

“Good-bye,” she continued. “You will have a letter from me--I am going
back to Swanage to-morrow.”

“Thank you.”

“Good-bye, and it’s you I thank.”

“I may order the motor round, mayn’t I?”

“That would be most kind.”

“I wish I had written. Ought I to have written?”

“Not at all.”

“There’s just one question--”

She shook her head. He looked a little bewildered as they parted.

They parted without shaking hands; she had kept the interview, for his
sake, in tints of the quietest grey. She thrilled with happiness ere
she reached her house. Others had loved her in the past, if one apply
to their brief desires so grave a word, but the others had been
“ninnies”--young men who had nothing to do, old men who could find
nobody better. And she had often ‘loved,’ too, but only so far as
the facts of sex demanded: mere yearnings for the masculine sex to be
dismissed for what they were worth, with a sigh. Never before had her
personality been touched. She was not young or very rich, and it amazed
her that a man of any standing should take her seriously.  As she sat,
trying to do accounts in her empty house, amidst beautiful pictures and
noble books, waves of emotion broke, as if a tide of passion was flowing
through the night air. She shook her head, tried to concentrate her
attention, and failed. In vain did she repeat: “But I’ve been through
this sort of thing before.” She had never been through it; the big
machinery, as opposed to the little, had been set in motion, and the
idea that Mr. Wilcox loved, obsessed her before she came to love him in
return.

She would come to no decision yet. “Oh, sir, this is so sudden”--that
prudish phrase exactly expressed her when her time came. Premonitions
are not preparation. She must examine more closely her own nature and
his; she must talk it over judicially with Helen. It had been a strange
love-scene--the central radiance unacknowledged from first to last. She,
in his place, would have said Ich liebe dich, but perhaps it was not
his habit to open the heart. He might have done it if she had pressed
him--as a matter of duty, perhaps; England expects every man to open
his heart once; but the effort would have jarred him, and never, if
she could avoid it, should he lose those defences that he had chosen to
raise against the world. He must never be bothered with emotional talk,
or with a display of sympathy. He was an elderly man now, and it would
be futile and impudent to correct him.

Mrs. Wilcox strayed in and out, ever a welcome ghost; surveying the
scene, thought Margaret, without one hint of bitterness.



CHAPTER XIX

If one wanted to show a foreigner England, perhaps the wisest course
would be to take him to the final section of the Purbeck Hills, and
stand him on their summit, a few miles to the east of Corfe. Then system
after system of our island would roll together under his feet. Beneath
him is the valley of the Frome, and all the wild lands that come tossing
down from Dorchester, black and gold, to mirror their gorse in the
expanses of Poole. The valley of the Stour is beyond, unaccountable
stream, dirty at Blandford, pure at Wimborne--the Stour, sliding out of
fat fields, to marry the Avon beneath the tower of Christ church. The
valley of the Avon--invisible, but far to the north the trained eye may
see Clearbury Ring that guards it, and the imagination may leap beyond
that on to Salisbury Plain itself, and beyond the Plain to all the
glorious downs of Central England. Nor is Suburbia absent. Bournemouth’s
ignoble coast cowers to the right, heralding the pine-trees that mean,
for all their beauty, red houses, and the Stock Exchange, and extend to
the gates of London itself. So tremendous is the City’s trail! But the
cliffs of Freshwater it shall never touch, and the island will guard the
Island’s purity till the end of time. Seen from the west the Wight is
beautiful beyond all laws of beauty. It is as if a fragment of England
floated forward to greet the foreigner--chalk of our chalk, turf of
our turf, epitome of what will follow. And behind the fragment lies
Southampton, hostess to the nations, and Portsmouth, a latent fire, and
all around it, with double and treble collision of tides, swirls the
sea. How many villages appear in this view! How many castles! How many
churches, vanished or triumphant! How many ships, railways, and roads!
What incredible variety of men working beneath that lucent sky to what
final end! The reason fails, like a wave on the Swanage beach; the
imagination swells, spreads, and deepens, until it becomes geographic
and encircles England.

So Frieda Mosebach, now Frau Architect Liesecke, and mother to her
husband’s baby, was brought up to these heights to be impressed, and,
after a prolonged gaze, she said that the hills were more swelling
here than in Pomerania, which was true, but did not seem to Mrs. Munt
apposite. Poole Harbour was dry, which led her to praise the absence of
muddy foreshore at Friedrich Wilhelms Bad, Rugen, where beech-trees hang
over the tideless Baltic, and cows may contemplate the brine. Rather
unhealthy Mrs. Munt thought this would be, water being safer when it
moved about.

“And your English lakes--Vindermere, Grasmere they, then, unhealthy?”

“No, Frau Liesecke; but that is because they are fresh water, and
different. Salt water ought to have tides, and go up and down a great
deal, or else it smells. Look, for instance, at an aquarium.”

“An aquarium! Oh, MEESIS Munt, you mean to tell me that fresh aquariums
stink less than salt? Why, then Victor, my brother-in-law, collected
many tadpoles--” “You are not to say ‘stink,’” interrupted Helen; “at
least, you may say it, but you must pretend you are being funny while
you say it.”

“Then ‘smell.’ And the mud of your Pool down there--does it not smell,
or may I say ‘stink,’ ha, ha?”

“There always has been mud in Poole Harbour,” said Mrs. Munt, with
a slight frown. “The rivers bring it down, and a most valuable
oyster-fishery depends upon it.”

“Yes, that is so,” conceded Frieda; and another international incident
was closed.

“‘Bournemouth is,’” resumed their hostess, quoting a local rhyme to
which she was much attached--“‘Bournemouth is, Poole was, and Swanage
is to be the most important town of all and biggest of the three.’ Now,
Frau Liesecke, I have shown you Bournemouth, and I have shown you Poole,
so let us walk backward a little, and look down again at Swanage.”

“Aunt Juley, wouldn’t that be Meg’s train?”

A tiny puff of smoke had been circling the harbour, and now was bearing
southwards towards them over the black and the gold.

“Oh, dearest Margaret, I do hope she won’t be overtired.”

“Oh, I do wonder--I do wonder whether she’s taken the house.”

“I hope she hasn’t been hasty.”

“So do I--oh, SO do I.”

“Will it be as beautiful as Wickham Place?” Frieda asked.

“I should think it would. Trust Mr. Wilcox for doing himself proud. All
those Ducie Street houses are beautiful in their modern way, and I can’t
think why he doesn’t keep on with it. But it’s really for Evie that he
went there, and now that Evie’s going to be married--”

“Ah!”

“You’ve never seen Miss Wilcox, Frieda. How absurdly matrimonial you
are!”

“But sister to that Paul?”

“Yes.”

“And to that Charles,” said Mrs. Munt with feeling. “Oh, Helen, Helen,
what a time that was!”

Helen laughed. “Meg and I haven’t got such tender hearts. If there’s a
chance of a cheap house, we go for it.”

“Now look, Frau Liesecke, at my niece’s train. You see, it is coming
towards us--coming, coming; and, when it gets to Corfe, it will actually
go THROUGH the downs, on which we are standing, so that, if we walk
over, as I suggested, and look down on Swanage, we shall see it coming
on the other side. Shall we?”

Frieda assented, and in a few minutes they had crossed the ridge and
exchanged the greater view for the lesser. Rather a dull valley lay
below, backed by the slope of the coastward downs. They were looking
across the Isle of Purbeck and on to Swanage, soon to be the most
important town of all, and ugliest of the three. Margaret’s train
reappeared as promised, and was greeted with approval by her aunt.
It came to a standstill in the middle distance, and there it had been
planned that Tibby should meet her, and drive her, and a tea-basket, up
to join them.

“You see,” continued Helen to her cousin, “the Wilcoxes collect houses
as your Victor collects tadpoles. They have, one, Ducie Street; two,
Howards End, where my great rumpus was; three, a country seat in
Shropshire; four, Charles has a house in Hilton; and five, another near
Epsom; and six, Evie will have a house when she marries, and probably a
pied-a-terre in the country--which makes seven. Oh yes, and Paul a
hut in Africa makes eight. I wish we could get Howards End. That was
something like a dear little house! Didn’t you think so, Aunt Juley?”

“I had too much to do, dear, to look at it,” said Mrs. Munt, with a
gracious dignity. “I had everything to settle and explain, and Charles
Wilcox to keep in his place besides. It isn’t likely I should remember
much. I just remember having lunch in your bedroom.”

“Yes, so do I. But, oh dear, dear, how dreadful it all seems! And in the
autumn there began that anti-Pauline movement--you, and Frieda, and
Meg, and Mrs. Wilcox, all obsessed with the idea that I might yet marry
Paul.”

“You yet may,” said Frieda despondently.

Helen shook her head. “The Great Wilcox Peril will never return. If I’m
certain of anything it’s of that.”

“One is certain of nothing but the truth of one’s own emotions.”

The remark fell damply on the conversation. But Helen slipped her arm
round her cousin, somehow liking her the better for making it. It was
not an original remark, nor had Frieda appropriated it passionately, for
she had a patriotic rather than a philosophic mind. Yet it betrayed that
interest in the universal which the average Teuton possesses and the
average Englishman does not. It was, however illogically, the good,
the beautiful, the true, as opposed to the respectable, the pretty,
the adequate. It was a landscape of Bocklin’s beside a landscape of
Leader’s, strident and ill-considered, but quivering into supernatural
life. It sharpened idealism, stirred the soul. It may have been a bad
preparation for what followed.

“Look!” cried Aunt Juley, hurrying away from generalities over the
narrow summit of the down. “Stand where I stand, and you will see the
pony-cart coming. I see the pony-cart coming.”

They stood and saw the pony-cart coming. Margaret and Tibby were
presently seen coming in it. Leaving the outskirts of Swanage, it drove
for a little through the budding lanes, and then began the ascent.

“Have you got the house?” they shouted, long before she could possibly
hear.

Helen ran down to meet her. The highroad passed over a saddle, and a
track went thence at right angles alone the ridge of the down.

“Have you got the house?”

Margaret shook her head.

“Oh, what a nuisance! So we’re as we were?”

“Not exactly.”

She got out, looking tired.

“Some mystery,” said Tibby. “We are to be enlightened presently.”

Margaret came close up to her and whispered that she had had a proposal
of marriage from Mr. Wilcox.

Helen was amused. She opened the gate on to the downs so that her
brother might lead the pony through. “It’s just like a widower,” she
remarked. “They’ve cheek enough for anything, and invariably select one
of their first wife’s friends.”

Margaret’s face flashed despair.

“That type--” She broke off with a cry. “Meg, not anything wrong with
you?”

“Wait one minute,” said Margaret, whispering always.

“But you’ve never conceivably--you’ve never--” She pulled herself
together. “Tibby, hurry up through; I can’t hold this gate indefinitely.
Aunt Juley! I say, Aunt Juley, make the tea, will you, and Frieda; we’ve
got to talk houses, and will come on afterwards.” And then, turning her
face to her sister’s, she burst into tears.

Margaret was stupefied. She heard herself saying, “Oh, really--” She
felt herself touched with a hand that trembled.

“Don’t,” sobbed Helen, “don’t, don’t, Meg, don’t!” She seemed incapable
of saying any other word. Margaret, trembling herself, led her forward
up the road, till they strayed through another gate on to the down.

“Don’t, don’t do such a thing! I tell you not to--don’t! I know--don’t!”

“What do you know?”

“Panic and emptiness,” sobbed Helen. “Don’t!”

Then Margaret thought, “Helen is a little selfish. I have never behaved
like this when there has seemed a chance of her marrying.” She said:
“But we would still see each other very--often, and you--”

“It’s not a thing like that,” sobbed Helen. And she broke right away and
wandered distractedly upwards, stretching her hands towards the view and
crying.

“What’s happened to you?” called Margaret, following through the wind
that gathers at sundown on the northern slopes of hills. “But it’s
stupid!” And suddenly stupidity seized her, and the immense landscape
was blurred. But Helen turned back.

“I don’t know what’s happened to either of us,” said Margaret, wiping
her eyes. “We must both have gone mad.” Then Helen wiped hers, and they
even laughed a little.

“Look here, sit down.”

“All right; I’ll sit down if you’ll sit down.”

“There. (One kiss.) Now, whatever, whatever is the matter?”

“I do mean what I said. Don’t; it wouldn’t do.”

“Oh, Helen, stop saying ‘don’t’! It’s ignorant. It’s as if your head
wasn’t out of the slime. ‘Don’t’ is probably what Mrs. Bast says all the
day to Mr. Bast.”

Helen was silent.

“Well?”

“Tell me about it first, and meanwhile perhaps I’ll have got my head out
of the slime.”

“That’s better. Well, where shall I begin? When I arrived at
Waterloo--no, I’ll go back before that, because I’m anxious you should
know everything from the first. The ‘first’ was about ten days ago. It
was the day Mr. Bast came to tea and lost his temper. I was defending
him, and Mr. Wilcox became jealous about me, however slightly. I thought
it was the involuntary thing, which men can’t help any more than we can.
You know--at least, I know in my own case--when a man has said to me,
‘So-and-so’s a pretty girl,’ I am seized with a momentary sourness
against So-and-so, and long to tweak her ear. It’s a tiresome feeling,
but not an important one, and one easily manages it. But it wasn’t only
this in Mr. Wilcox’s case, I gather now.”

“Then you love him?”

Margaret considered. “It is wonderful knowing that a real man cares for
you,” she said. “The mere fact of that grows more tremendous. Remember,
I’ve known and liked him steadily for nearly three years.”

“But loved him?”

Margaret peered into her past. It is pleasant to analyse feelings while
they are still only feelings, and unembodied in the social fabric. With
her arm round Helen, and her eyes shifting over the view, as if this
country or that could reveal the secret of her own heart, she meditated
honestly, and said, “No.”

“But you will?”

“Yes,” said Margaret, “of that I’m pretty sure. Indeed, I began the
moment he spoke to me.”

“And have settled to marry him?”

“I had, but am wanting a long talk about it now. What is it against him,
Helen? You must try and say.”

Helen, in her turn, looked outwards. “It is ever since Paul,” she said
finally.

“But what has Mr. Wilcox to do with Paul?”

“But he was there, they were all there that morning when I came down
to breakfast, and saw that Paul was frightened--the man who loved me
frightened and all his paraphernalia fallen, so that I knew it was
impossible, because personal relations are the important thing for ever
and ever, and not this outer life of telegrams and anger.”

She poured the sentence forth in one breath, but her sister understood
it, because it touched on thoughts that were familiar between them.

“That’s foolish. In the first place, I disagree about the outer life.
Well, we’ve often argued that. The real point is that there is the
widest gulf between my love-making and yours. Yours was romance; mine
will be prose. I’m not running it down--a very good kind of prose, but
well considered, well thought out. For instance, I know all Mr. Wilcox’s
faults. He’s afraid of emotion. He cares too much about success, too
little about the past. His sympathy lacks poetry, and so isn’t sympathy
really. I’d even say”--she looked at the shining lagoons--“that,
spiritually, he’s not as honest as I am. Doesn’t that satisfy you?”

“No, it doesn’t,” said Helen. “It makes me feel worse and worse. You
must be mad.”

Margaret made a movement of irritation.

“I don’t intend him, or any man or any woman, to be all my life--good
heavens, no! There are heaps of things in me that he doesn’t, and shall
never, understand.”

Thus she spoke before the wedding ceremony and the physical union,
before the astonishing glass shade had fallen that interposes between
married couples and the world. She was to keep her independence more
than do most women as yet. Marriage was to alter her fortunes rather
than her character, and she was not far wrong in boasting that she
understood her future husband. Yet he did alter her character--a little.
There was an unforeseen surprise, a cessation of the winds and odours of
life, a social pressure that would have her think conjugally.

“So with him,” she continued. “There are heaps of things in him--more
especially things that he does that will always be hidden from me. He
has all those public qualities which you so despise and which enable all
this--” She waved her hand at the landscape, which confirmed anything.
“If Wilcoxes hadn’t worked and died in England for thousands of years,
you and I couldn’t sit here without having our throats cut. There would
be no trains, no ships to carry us literary people about in, no fields
even. Just savagery. No--perhaps not even that. Without their spirit
life might never have moved out of protoplasm. More and more do I refuse
to draw my income and sneer at those who guarantee it. There are times
when it seems to me--”

“And to me, and to all women. So one kissed Paul.”

“That’s brutal,” said Margaret. “Mine is an absolutely different case.
I’ve thought things out.”

“It makes no difference thinking things out. They come to the same.”

“Rubbish!”

There was a long silence, during which the tide returned into Poole
Harbour. “One would lose something,” murmured Helen, apparently to
herself. The water crept over the mud-flats towards the gorse and the
blackened heather. Branksea Island lost its immense foreshores, and
became a sombre episode of trees. Frome was forced inward towards
Dorchester, Stour against Wimborne, Avon towards Salisbury, and over the
immense displacement the sun presided, leading it to triumph ere he sank
to rest. England was alive, throbbing through all her estuaries, crying
for joy through the mouths of all her gulls, and the north wind, with
contrary motion, blew stronger against her rising seas. What did it
mean? For what end are her fair complexities, her changes of soil, her
sinuous coast? Does she belong to those who have moulded her and made
her feared by other lands, or to those who have added nothing to her
power, but have somehow seen her, seen the whole island at once, lying
as a jewel in a silver sea, sailing as a ship of souls, with all the
brave world’s fleet accompanying her towards eternity?



CHAPTER XX

Margaret had often wondered at the disturbance that takes place in the
world’s waters, when Love, who seems so tiny a pebble, slips in. Whom
does Love concern beyond the beloved and the lover? Yet his impact
deluges a hundred shores. No doubt the disturbance is really the spirit
of the generations, welcoming the new generation, and chafing against
the ultimate Fate, who holds all the seas in the palm of her hand. But
Love cannot understand this. He cannot comprehend another’s infinity; he
is conscious only of his own--flying sunbeam, falling rose, pebble that
asks for one quiet plunge below the fretting interplay of space and
time. He knows that he will survive at the end of things, and be
gathered by Fate as a jewel from the slime, and be handed with
admiration round the assembly of the gods. “Men did produce this”
 they will say, and, saying, they will give men immortality. But
meanwhile--what agitations meanwhile! The foundations of Property and
Propriety are laid bare, twin rocks; Family Pride flounders to the
surface, puffing and blowing and refusing to be comforted; Theology,
vaguely ascetic, gets up a nasty ground swell. Then the lawyers are
aroused--cold brood--and creep out of their holes. They do what they
can; they tidy up Property and Propriety, reassure Theology and Family
Pride. Half-guineas are poured on the troubled waters, the lawyers creep
back, and, if all has gone well, Love joins one man and woman together
in Matrimony.

Margaret had expected the disturbance, and was not irritated by it.
For a sensitive woman she had steady nerves, and could bear with the
incongruous and the grotesque; and, besides, there was nothing excessive
about her love-affair. Good-humour was the dominant note of her
relations with Mr. Wilcox, or, as I must now call him, Henry. Henry
did not encourage romance, and she was no girl to fidget for it. An
acquaintance had become a lover, might become a husband, but would
retain all that she had noted in the acquaintance; and love must confirm
an old relation rather than reveal a new one.

In this spirit she promised to marry him.

He was in Swanage on the morrow bearing the engagement ring.

They greeted one another with a hearty cordiality that impressed
Aunt Juley. Henry dined at The Bays, but had engaged a bedroom in the
principal hotel; he was one of those men who know the principal hotel by
instinct. After dinner he asked Margaret if she wouldn’t care for a turn
on the Parade. She accepted, and could not repress a little tremor; it
would be her first real love scene. But as she put on her hat she burst
out laughing. Love was so unlike the article served up in books; the
joy, though genuine was different; the mystery an unexpected mystery.
For one thing, Mr. Wilcox still seemed a stranger.

For a time they talked about the ring; then she said: “Do you remember
the Embankment at Chelsea? It can’t be ten days ago.”

“Yes,” he said, laughing. “And you and your sister were head and ears
deep in some Quixotic scheme. Ah well!”

“I little thought then, certainly. Did you?”

“I don’t know about that; I shouldn’t like to say.”

“Why, was it earlier?” she cried. “Did you think of me this way earlier!
How extraordinarily interesting, Henry! Tell me.”

But Henry had no intention of telling. Perhaps he could not have told,
for his mental states became obscure as soon as he had passed through
them. He misliked the very word “interesting,” connoting it with wasted
energy and even with morbidity. Hard facts were enough for him.

“I didn’t think of it,” she pursued. “No; when you spoke to me in the
drawing-room, that was practically the first. It was all so different
from what it’s supposed to be. On the stage, or in books, a proposal
is--how shall I put it?--a full-blown affair, a kind of bouquet;
it loses its literal meaning. But in life a proposal really is a
proposal--”

“By the way--”

“--a suggestion, a seed,” she concluded; and the thought flew away
into darkness.

“I was thinking, if you didn’t mind, that we ought to spend this evening
in a business talk; there will be so much to settle.”

“I think so too.  Tell me, in the first place, how did you get on with Tibby?”

“With your brother?”

“Yes, during cigarettes.”

“Oh, very well.”

“I am so glad,” she answered, a little surprised. “What did you talk
about? Me, presumably.”

“About Greece too.”

“Greece was a very good card, Henry. Tibby’s only a boy still, and one
has to pick and choose subjects a little. Well done.”

“I was telling him I have shares in a currant-farm near Calamata.”

“What a delightful thing to have shares in! Can’t we go there for our
honeymoon?”

“What to do?”

“To eat the currants. And isn’t there marvellous scenery?”

“Moderately, but it’s not the kind of place one could possibly go to
with a lady.”

“Why not?”

“No hotels.”

“Some ladies do without hotels. Are you aware that Helen and I have
walked alone over the Apennines, with our luggage on our backs?”

“I wasn’t aware, and, if I can manage it, you will never do such a thing
again.”

She said more gravely: “You haven’t found time for a talk with Helen
yet, I suppose?”

“No.”

“Do, before you go. I am so anxious you two should be friends.”

“Your sister and I have always hit it off,” he said negligently. “But
we’re drifting away from our business. Let me begin at the beginning.
You know that Evie is going to marry Percy Cahill.”

“Dolly’s uncle.”

“Exactly. The girl’s madly in love with him. A very good sort of fellow,
but he demands--and rightly--a suitable provision with her. And in the
second place you will naturally understand, there is Charles. Before
leaving town, I wrote Charles a very careful letter. You see, he has
an increasing family and increasing expenses, and the I. and W. A. is
nothing particular just now, though capable of development.”

“Poor fellow!” murmured Margaret, looking out to sea, and not
understanding.

“Charles being the elder son, some day Charles will have Howards End;
but I am anxious, in my own happiness, not to be unjust to others.”

“Of course not,” she began, and then gave a little cry. “you mean money.
How stupid I am! Of course not!”

Oddly enough, he winced a little at the word. “Yes, Money, since you put
it so frankly. I am determined to be just to all--just to you, just to
them. I am determined that my children shall have me.”

“Be generous to them,” she said sharply. “Bother justice!”

“I am determined--and have already written to Charles to that effect--”

“But how much have you got?”

“What?”

“How much have you a year? I’ve six hundred.”

“My income?”

“Yes. We must begin with how much you have, before we can settle how
much you can give Charles. Justice, and even generosity, depend on
that.”

“I must say you’re a downright young woman,” he observed, patting her
arm and laughing a little. “What a question to spring on a fellow!”

“Don’t you know your income? Or don’t you want to tell it me?”

“I--”

“That’s all right”--now she patted him--“don’t tell me. I don’t want to
know. I can do the sum just as well by proportion. Divide your income
into ten parts. How many parts would you give to Evie, how many to
Charles, how many to Paul?”

“The fact is, my dear, I hadn’t any intention of bothering you with
details. I only wanted to let you know that--well, that something must
be done for the others, and you’ve understood me perfectly, so let’s
pass on to the next point.”

“Yes, we’ve settled that,” said Margaret, undisturbed by his strategic
blunderings. “Go ahead; give away all you can, bearing in mind that I’ve
a clear six hundred. What a mercy it is to have all this money about
one.”

“We’ve none too much, I assure you; you’re marrying a poor man.”

“Helen wouldn’t agree with me here,” she continued. “Helen daren’t slang
the rich, being rich herself, but she would like to. There’s an odd
notion, that I haven’t yet got hold of, running about at the back of her
brain, that poverty is somehow ‘real.’ She dislikes all organisation,
and probably confuses wealth with the technique of wealth. Sovereigns in
a stocking wouldn’t bother her; cheques do. Helen is too relentless. One
can’t deal in her high-handed manner with the world.”

“There’s this other point, and then I must go back to my hotel and write
some letters. What’s to be done now about the house in Ducie Street?”

“Keep it on--at least, it depends. When do you want to marry me?”

She raised her voice, as too often, and some youths, who were also
taking the evening air, overheard her. “Getting a bit hot, eh?” said
one. Mr. Wilcox turned on them, and said sharply, “I say!” There was
silence. “Take care I don’t report you to the police.” They moved away
quietly enough, but were only biding their time, and the rest of the
conversation was punctuated by peals of ungovernable laughter.

Lowering his voice and infusing a hint of reproof into it, he said:
“Evie will probably be married in September. We could scarcely think of
anything before then.”

“The earlier the nicer, Henry. Females are not supposed to say such
things, but the earlier the nicer.”

“How about September for us too?” he asked, rather dryly.

“Right. Shall we go into Ducie Street ourselves in September? Or shall
we try to bounce Helen and Tibby into it? That’s rather an idea. They
are so unbusinesslike, we could make them do anything by judicious
management. Look here--yes. We’ll do that. And we ourselves could live
at Howards End or Shropshire.”

He blew out his cheeks. “Heavens! how you women do fly round! My head’s
in a whirl. Point by point, Margaret. Howards End’s impossible. I let
it to Hamar Bryce on a three years’ agreement last March. Don’t you
remember? Oniton. Well, that is much, much too far away to rely on
entirely. You will be able to be down there entertaining a certain
amount, but we must have a house within easy reach of Town. Only Ducie
Street has huge drawbacks. There’s a mews behind.”

Margaret could not help laughing. It was the first she had heard of
the mews behind Ducie Street. When she was a possible tenant it had
suppressed itself, not consciously, but automatically. The breezy
Wilcox manner, though genuine, lacked the clearness of vision that is
imperative for truth. When Henry lived in Ducie Street he remembered
the mews; when he tried to let he forgot it; and if any one had remarked
that the mews must be either there or not, he would have felt annoyed,
and afterwards have found some opportunity of stigmatising the speaker
as academic. So does my grocer stigmatise me when I complain of the
quality of his sultanas, and he answers in one breath that they are the
best sultanas, and how can I expect the best sultanas at that price? It
is a flaw inherent in the business mind, and Margaret may do well to
be tender to it, considering all that the business mind has done for
England.

“Yes, in summer especially, the mews is a serious nuisance. The
smoking-room, too, is an abominable little den. The house opposite
has been taken by operatic people. Ducie Street’s going down, it’s my
private opinion.”

“How sad! It’s only a few years since they built those pretty houses.”

“Shows things are moving. Good for trade.”

“I hate this continual flux of London. It is an epitome of us at
our worst--eternal formlessness; all the qualities, good, bad, and
indifferent, streaming away--streaming, streaming for ever. That’s why I
dread it so. I mistrust rivers, even in scenery. Now, the sea--”

“High tide, yes.”

“Hoy toid”--from the promenading youths.

“And these are the men to whom we give the vote,” observed Mr. Wilcox,
omitting to add that they were also the men to whom he gave work as
clerks--work that scarcely encouraged them to grow into other men.
“However, they have their own lives and interests. Let’s get on.”

He turned as he spoke, and prepared to see her back to The Bays. The
business was over. His hotel was in the opposite direction, and if he
accompanied her his letters would be late for the post. She implored him
not to come, but he was obdurate.

“A nice beginning, if your aunt saw you slip in alone!”

“But I always do go about alone. Considering I’ve walked over the
Apennines, it’s common sense. You will make me so angry. I don’t the
least take it as a compliment.”

He laughed, and lit a cigar. “It isn’t meant as a compliment, my dear. I
just won’t have you going about in the dark. Such people about too! It’s
dangerous.”

“Can’t I look after myself? I do wish--”

“Come along, Margaret; no wheedling.”

A younger woman might have resented his masterly ways, but Margaret
had too firm a grip of life to make a fuss. She was, in her own way, as
masterly. If he was a fortress she was a mountain peak, whom all might
tread, but whom the snows made nightly virginal. Disdaining the heroic
outfit, excitable in her methods, garrulous, episodical, shrill,
she misled her lover much as she had misled her aunt. He mistook her
fertility for Weakness. He supposed her “as clever as they make them,”
 but no more, not realising that she was penetrating to the depths of his
soul, and approving of what she found there.

And if insight were sufficient, if the inner life were the whole of
life, their happiness had been assured.

They walked ahead briskly. The parade and the road after it were well
lighted, but it was darker in Aunt Juley’s garden. As they were going
up by the side-paths, through some rhododendrons, Mr. Wilcox, who was
in front, said “Margaret” rather huskily, turned, dropped his cigar, and
took her in his arms.

She was startled, and nearly screamed, but recovered herself at once,
and kissed with genuine love the lips that were pressed against her own.
It was their first kiss, and when it was over he saw her safely to the
door and rang the bell for her but disappeared into the night before the
maid answered it. On looking back, the incident displeased her. It was
so isolated. Nothing in their previous conversation had heralded it,
and, worse still, no tenderness had ensued. If a man cannot lead up to
passion he can at all events lead down from it, and she had hoped,
after her complaisance, for some interchange of gentle words. But he had
hurried away as if ashamed, and for an instant she was reminded of Helen
and Paul.



CHAPTER XXI

Charles had just been scolding his Dolly. She deserved the scolding, and
had bent before it, but her head, though bloody was unsubdued and her
chirrupings began to mingle with his retreating thunder.

“You’ve waked the baby. I knew you would. (Rum-ti-foo,
Rackety-tackety-Tompkin!) I’m not responsible for what Uncle Percy does,
nor for anybody else or anything, so there!”

“Who asked him while I was away? Who asked my sister down to meet him?
Who sent them out in the motor day after day?”

“Charles, that reminds me of some poem.”

“Does it indeed? We shall all be dancing to a very different music
presently. Miss Schlegel has fairly got us on toast.”

“I could simply scratch that woman’s eyes out, and to say it’s my fault
is most unfair.”

“It’s your fault, and five months ago you admitted it.”

“I didn’t.”

“You did.”

“Tootle, tootle, playing on the pootle!” exclaimed Dolly, suddenly
devoting herself to the child.

“It’s all very well to turn the conversation, but father would
never have dreamt of marrying as long as Evie was there to make him
comfortable. But you must needs start match-making. Besides, Cahill’s
too old.”

“Of course, if you’re going to be rude to Uncle Percy.”

“Miss Schlegel always meant to get hold of Howards End, and, thanks to
you, she’s got it.”

“I call the way you twist things round and make them hang together most
unfair. You couldn’t have been nastier if you’d caught me flirting.
Could he, diddums?”

“We’re in a bad hole, and must make the best of it. I shall answer the
pater’s letter civilly. He’s evidently anxious to do the decent thing.
But I do not intend to forget these Schlegels in a hurry. As long
as they’re on their best behaviour--Dolly, are you listening?--we’ll
behave, too. But if I find them giving themselves airs or monopolising
my father, or at all ill-treating him, or worrying him with their
artistic beastliness, I intend to put my foot down, yes, firmly. Taking
my mother’s place! Heaven knows what poor old Paul will say when the
news reaches him.”

The interlude closes. It has taken place in Charles’s garden at Hilton.
He and Dolly are sitting in deckchairs, and their motor is regarding
them placidly from its garage across the lawn. A short-frocked edition
of Charles also regards them placidly; a perambulator edition is
squeaking; a third edition is expected shortly. Nature is turning out
Wilcoxes in this peaceful abode, so that they may inherit the earth.



CHAPTER XXII

Margaret greeted her lord with peculiar tenderness on the morrow. Mature
as he was, she might yet be able to help him to the building of the
rainbow bridge that should connect the prose in us with the passion.
Without it we are meaningless fragments, half monks, half beasts,
unconnected arches that have never joined into a man. With it love is
born, and alights on the highest curve, glowing against the grey, sober
against the fire. Happy the man who sees from either aspect the glory of
these outspread wings. The roads of his soul lie clear, and he and his
friends shall find easy-going.

It was hard-going in the roads of Mr. Wilcox’s soul. From boyhood he
had neglected them. “I am not a fellow who bothers about my own inside.”
 Outwardly he was cheerful, reliable, and brave; but within, all
had reverted to chaos, ruled, so far as it was ruled at all, by an
incomplete asceticism. Whether as boy, husband, or widower, he had
always the sneaking belief that bodily passion is bad, a belief that is
desirable only when held passionately. Religion had confirmed him. The
words that were read aloud on Sunday to him and to other respectable men
were the words that had once kindled the souls of St. Catherine and St.
Francis into a white-hot hatred of the carnal. He could not be as the
saints and love the Infinite with a seraphic ardour, but he could be a
little ashamed of loving a wife. Amabat, amare timebat. And it was here
that Margaret hoped to help him.

It did not seem so difficult. She need trouble him with no gift of her
own. She would only point out the salvation that was latent in his own
soul, and in the soul of every man. Only connect! That was the whole
of her sermon. Only connect the prose and the passion, and both will be
exalted, and human love will be seen at its height. Live in fragments no
longer. Only connect and the beast and the monk, robbed of the isolation
that is life to either, will die.

Nor was the message difficult to give. It need not take the form of a
good “talking.” By quiet indications the bridge would be built and span
their lives with beauty.

But she failed. For there was one quality in Henry for which she was
never prepared, however much she reminded herself of it: his obtuseness.
He simply did not notice things, and there was no more to be said. He
never noticed that Helen and Frieda were hostile, or that Tibby was
not interested in currant plantations; he never noticed the lights and
shades that exist in the greyest conversation, the finger-posts, the
milestones, the collisions, the illimitable views. Once--on another
occasion--she scolded him about it. He was puzzled, but replied with a
laugh: “My motto is Concentrate. I’ve no intention of frittering away
my strength on that sort of thing.” “It isn’t frittering away the
strength,” she protested. “It’s enlarging the space in which you may
be strong.” He answered: “You’re a clever little woman, but my motto’s
Concentrate.” And this morning he concentrated with a vengeance.

They met in the rhododendrons of yesterday. In the daylight the bushes
were inconsiderable and the path was bright in the morning sun. She was
with Helen, who had been ominously quiet since the affair was settled.
“Here we all are!” she cried, and took him by one hand, retaining her
sister’s in the other.

“Here we are. Good-morning, Helen.”

Helen replied, “Good-morning, Mr. Wilcox.”

“Henry, she has had such a nice letter from the queer, cross boy. Do
you remember him? He had a sad moustache, but the back of his head was
young.”

“I have had a letter too. Not a nice one--I want to talk it over with
you”; for Leonard Bast was nothing to him now that she had given him her
word; the triangle of sex was broken for ever.

“Thanks to your hint, he’s clearing out of the Porphyrion.”

“Not a bad business that Porphyrion,” he said absently, as he took his
own letter out of his pocket.

“Not a BAD--” she exclaimed, dropping his hand. “Surely, on Chelsea
Embankment--”

“Here’s our hostess. Good-morning, Mrs. Munt. Fine rhododendrons.
Good-morning, Frau Liesecke; we manage to grow flowers in England, don’t
we?”

“Not a BAD business?”

“No. My letter’s about Howards End. Bryce has been ordered abroad, and
wants to sublet it--I am far from sure that I shall give him permission.
There was no clause in the agreement. In my opinion, subletting is a
mistake. If he can find me another tenant, whom I consider suitable,
I may cancel the agreement. Morning, Schlegel. Don’t you think that’s
better than subletting?”

Helen had dropped her hand now, and he had steered her past the whole
party to the seaward side of the house. Beneath them was the bourgeois
little bay, which must have yearned all through the centuries for just
such a watering-place as Swanage to be built on its margin.

The waves were colourless, and the Bournemouth steamer gave a further
touch of insipidity, drawn up against the pier and hooting wildly for
excursionists.

“When there is a sublet I find that damage--”

“Do excuse me, but about the Porphyrion. I don’t feel easy--might I just
bother you, Henry?”

Her manner was so serious that he stopped, and asked her a little
sharply what she wanted.

“You said on Chelsea Embankment, surely, that it was a bad concern, so
we advised this clerk to clear out. He writes this morning that he’s
taken our advice, and now you say it’s not a bad concern.”

“A clerk who clears out of any concern, good or bad, without securing a
berth somewhere else first, is a fool, and I’ve no pity for him.”

“He has not done that. He’s going into a bank in Camden Town, he says.
The salary’s much lower, but he hopes to manage--a branch of Dempster’s
Bank. Is that all right?”

“Dempster! Why goodness me, yes.”

“More right than the Porphyrion?”

“Yes, yes, yes; safe as houses--safer.”

“Very many thanks. I’m sorry--if you sublet--?”

“If he sublets, I shan’t have the same control. In theory there should
be no more damage done at Howards End; in practice there will be. Things
may be done for which no money can compensate. For instance, I shouldn’t
want that fine wych-elm spoilt. It hangs--Margaret, we must go and see
the old place some time. It’s pretty in its way. We’ll motor down and
have lunch with Charles.”

“I should enjoy that,” said Margaret bravely.

“What about next Wednesday?”

“Wednesday? No, I couldn’t well do that. Aunt Juley expects us to stop
here another week at least.”

“But you can give that up now.”

“Er--no,” said Margaret, after a moment’s thought.

“Oh, that’ll be all right. I’ll speak to her.”

“This visit is a high solemnity. My aunt counts on it year after
year. She turns the house upside down for us; she invites our special
friends--she scarcely knows Frieda, and we can’t leave her on her hands.
I missed one day, and she would be so hurt if I didn’t stay the full
ten.”

“But I’ll say a word to her. Don’t you bother.”

“Henry, I won’t go. Don’t bully me.”

“You want to see the house, though?”

“Very much--I’ve heard so much about it, one way or the other. Aren’t
there pigs’ teeth in the wych-elm?”

“PIGS TEETH?”

“And you chew the bark for toothache.”

“What a rum notion! Of course not!”

“Perhaps I have confused it with some other tree. There are still a
great number of sacred trees in England, it seems.”

But he left her to intercept Mrs. Munt, whose voice could be heard in
the distance; to be intercepted himself by Helen.

“Oh. Mr. Wilcox, about the Porphyrion--” she began and went scarlet all
over her face.

“It’s all right,” called Margaret, catching them up. “Dempster’s Bank’s
better.”

“But I think you told us the Porphyrion was bad, and would smash before
Christmas.”

“Did I? It was still outside the Tariff Ring, and had to take rotten
policies. Lately it came in--safe as houses now.”

“In other words, Mr. Bast need never have left it.”

“No, the fellow needn’t.”

“--and needn’t have started life elsewhere at a greatly reduced salary.”

“He only says ‘reduced,’” corrected Margaret, seeing trouble ahead.

“With a man so poor, every reduction must be great. I consider it a
deplorable misfortune.”

Mr. Wilcox, intent on his business with Mrs. Munt, was going steadily
on, but the last remark made him say: “What? What’s that? Do you mean
that I’m responsible?”

“You’re ridiculous, Helen.”

“You seem to think--” He looked at his watch. “Let me explain the point
to you. It is like this. You seem to assume, when a business concern is
conducting a delicate negotiation, it ought to keep the public informed
stage by stage. The Porphyrion, according to you, was bound to say, ‘I
am trying all I can to get into the Tariff Ring. I am not sure that
I shall succeed, but it is the only thing that will save me from
insolvency, and I am trying.’ My dear Helen--”

“Is that your point? A man who had little money has less--that’s mine.”

“I am grieved for your clerk. But it is all in the day’s work. It’s part
of the battle of life.”

“A man who had little money--” she repeated, “has less, owing to
us. Under these circumstances I consider ‘the battle of life’ a happy
expression.”

“Oh come, come!” he protested pleasantly, “you’re not to blame. No one’s
to blame.”

“Is no one to blame for anything?”

“I wouldn’t say that, but you’re taking it far too seriously. Who is
this fellow?”

“We have told you about the fellow twice already,” said Helen. “You
have even met the fellow. He is very poor and his wife is an
extravagant imbecile. He is capable of better things. We--we, the upper
classes--thought we would help him from the height of our superior
knowledge--and here’s the result!”

He raised his finger. “Now, a word of advice.”

“I require no more advice.”

“A word of advice. Don’t take up that sentimental attitude over the
poor. See that she doesn’t, Margaret. The poor are poor, and one’s sorry
for them, but there it is. As civilisation moves forward, the shoe is
bound to pinch in places, and it’s absurd to pretend that any one is
responsible personally. Neither you, nor I, nor my informant, nor the
man who informed him, nor the directors of the Porphyrion, are to blame
for this clerk’s loss of salary. It’s just the shoe pinching--no one can
help it; and it might easily have been worse.”

Helen quivered with indignation.

“By all means subscribe to charities--subscribe to them largely--but
don’t get carried away by absurd schemes of Social Reform. I see a good
deal behind the scenes, and you can take it from me that there is no
Social Question--except for a few journalists who try to get a living
out of the phrase. There are just rich and poor, as there always have
been and always will be. Point me out a time when men have been equal--”

“I didn’t say--”

“Point me out a time when desire for equality has made them happier. No,
no. You can’t. There always have been rich and poor. I’m no fatalist.
Heaven forbid! But our civilisation is moulded by great impersonal
forces” (his voice grew complacent; it always did when he eliminated the
personal), “and there always will be rich and poor. You can’t deny it”
 (and now it was a respectful voice)--“and you can’t deny that, in spite
of all, the tendency of civilisation has on the whole been upward.”

“Owing to God, I suppose,” flashed Helen.

He stared at her.

“You grab the dollars. God does the rest.”

It was no good instructing the girl if she was going to talk about God
in that neurotic modern way. Fraternal to the last, he left her for
the quieter company of Mrs. Munt. He thought, “She rather reminds me of
Dolly.”

Helen looked out at the sea.

“Don’t ever discuss political economy with Henry,” advised her sister.
“It’ll only end in a cry.”

“But he must be one of those men who have reconciled science with
religion,” said Helen slowly. “I don’t like those men. They are
scientific themselves, and talk of the survival of the fittest, and cut
down the salaries of their clerks, and stunt the independence of all who
may menace their comfort, but yet they believe that somehow good--it
is always that sloppy ‘somehow’ will be the outcome, and that in some
mystical way the Mr. Basts of the future will benefit because the Mr.
Brits of today are in pain.”

“He is such a man in theory. But oh, Helen, in theory!”

“But oh, Meg, what a theory!”

“Why should you put things so bitterly, dearie?”

“Because I’m an old maid,” said Helen, biting her lip. “I can’t think
why I go on like this myself.” She shook off her sister’s hand and went
into the house. Margaret, distressed at the day’s beginning, followed
the Bournemouth steamer with her eyes. She saw that Helen’s nerves
were exasperated by the unlucky Bast business beyond the bounds of
politeness. There might at any minute be a real explosion, which even
Henry would notice. Henry must be removed.

“Margaret!” her aunt called. “Magsy! It isn’t true, surely, what Mr.
Wilcox says, that you want to go away early next week?”

“Not ‘want,’” was Margaret’s prompt reply; “but there is so much to be
settled, and I do want to see the Charles’s.”

“But going away without taking the Weymouth trip, or even the Lulworth?”
 said Mrs. Munt, coming nearer. “Without going once more up Nine Barrows
Down?”

“I’m afraid so.”

Mr. Wilcox rejoined her with, “Good! I did the breaking of the ice.”

A wave of tenderness came over her. She put a hand on either shoulder,
and looked deeply into the black, bright eyes. What was behind their
competent stare? She knew, but was not disquieted.



CHAPTER XXIII

Margaret had no intention of letting things slide, and the evening
before she left Swanage she gave her sister a thorough scolding. She
censured her, not for disapproving of the engagement, but for throwing
over her disapproval a veil of mystery. Helen was equally frank. “Yes,”
 she said, with the air of one looking inwards, “there is a mystery.
I can’t help it. It’s not my fault. It’s the way life has been made.”
 Helen in those days was over-interested in the subconscious self. She
exaggerated the Punch and Judy aspect of life, and spoke of mankind as
puppets, whom an invisible showman twitches into love and war. Margaret
pointed out that if she dwelt on this she, too, would eliminate the
personal. Helen was silent for a minute, and then burst into a queer
speech, which cleared the air. “Go on and marry him. I think you’re
splendid; and if any one can pull it off, you will.” Margaret denied
that there was anything to “pull off,” but she continued: “Yes, there
is, and I wasn’t up to it with Paul. I can do only what’s easy. I
can only entice and be enticed. I can’t, and won’t, attempt difficult
relations. If I marry, it will either be a man who’s strong enough to
boss me or whom I’m strong enough to boss. So I shan’t ever marry, for
there aren’t such men. And Heaven help any one whom I do marry, for I
shall certainly run away from him before you can say ‘Jack Robinson.’
There! Because I’m uneducated. But you, you’re different; you’re a
heroine.”

“Oh, Helen! Am I? Will it be as dreadful for poor Henry as all that?”

“You mean to keep proportion, and that’s heroic, it’s Greek, and I don’t
see why it shouldn’t succeed with you. Go on and fight with him and help
him. Don’t ask me for help, or even for sympathy. Henceforward I’m going
my own way. I mean to be thorough, because thoroughness is easy. I
mean to dislike your husband, and to tell him so. I mean to make no
concessions to Tibby. If Tibby wants to live with me, he must lump me.
I mean to love you more than ever. Yes, I do. You and I have built
up something real, because it is purely spiritual. There’s no veil of
mystery over us. Unreality and mystery begin as soon as one touches the
body. The popular view is, as usual, exactly the wrong one. Our bothers
are over tangible things--money, husbands, house-hunting. But Heaven
will work of itself.”

Margaret was grateful for this expression of affection, and answered,
“Perhaps.” All vistas close in the unseen--no one doubts it--but Helen
closed them rather too quickly for her taste. At every turn of speech
one was confronted with reality and the absolute. Perhaps Margaret grew
too old for metaphysics, perhaps Henry was weaning her from them, but
she felt that there was something a little unbalanced in the mind that
so readily shreds the visible. The business man who assumes that this
life is everything, and the mystic who asserts that it is nothing, fail,
on this side and on that, to hit the truth. “Yes, I see, dear; it’s
about half-way between,” Aunt Juley had hazarded in earlier years. No;
truth, being alive, was not half-way between anything. It was only to be
found by continuous excursions into either realm, and though proportion
is the final secret, to espouse it at the outset is to insure sterility.

Helen, agreeing here, disagreeing there, would have talked till
midnight, but Margaret, with her packing to do, focussed the
conversation on Henry. She might abuse Henry behind his back, but please
would she always be civil to him in company? “I definitely dislike
him, but I’ll do what I can,” promised Helen. “Do what you can with my
friends in return.”

This conversation made Margaret easier. Their inner life was so safe
that they could bargain over externals in a way that would have been
incredible to Aunt Juley, and impossible for Tibby or Charles. There
are moments when the inner life actually “pays,” when years of
self-scrutiny, conducted for no ulterior motive, are suddenly of
practical use. Such moments are still rare in the West; that they come
at all promises a fairer future. Margaret, though unable to understand
her sister, was assured against estrangement, and returned to London
with a more peaceful mind.

The following morning, at eleven o’clock, she presented herself at the
offices of the Imperial and West African Rubber Company. She was glad to
go there, for Henry had implied his business rather than described
it, and the formlessness and vagueness that one associates with Africa
itself had hitherto brooded over the main sources of his wealth.
Not that a visit to the office cleared things up. There was just the
ordinary surface scum of ledgers and polished counters and brass bars
that began and stopped for no possible reason, of electric-light globes
blossoming in triplets, of little rabbit-hutches faced with glass or
wire, of little rabbits. And even when she penetrated to the inner
depths, she found only the ordinary table and Turkey carpet, and though
the map over the fireplace did depict a helping of West Africa, it was
a very ordinary map. Another map hung opposite, on which the whole
continent appeared, looking like a whale marked out for a blubber,
and by its side was a door, shut, but Henry’s voice came through it,
dictating a “strong” letter. She might have been at the Porphyrion, or
Dempster’s Bank, or her own wine-merchant’s. Everything seems just
alike in these days. But perhaps she was seeing the Imperial side of the
company rather than its West African, and Imperialism always had been
one of her difficulties.

“One minute!” called Mr. Wilcox on receiving her name. He touched a
bell, the effect of which was to produce Charles.

Charles had written his father an adequate letter--more adequate than
Evie’s, through which a girlish indignation throbbed. And he greeted his
future stepmother with propriety.

“I hope that my wife--how do you do?--will give you a decent lunch,” was
his opening. “I left instructions, but we live in a rough-and-ready way.
She expects you back to tea, too, after you have had a look at Howards
End. I wonder what you’ll think of the place. I wouldn’t touch it with
tongs myself. Do sit down! It’s a measly little place.”

“I shall enjoy seeing it,” said Margaret, feeling, for the first time,
shy.

“You’ll see it at its worst, for Bryce decamped abroad last Monday
without even arranging for a charwoman to clear up after him. I never
saw such a disgraceful mess. It’s unbelievable. He wasn’t in the house a
month.”

“I’ve more than a little bone to pick with Bryce,” called Henry from the
inner chamber.

“Why did he go so suddenly?”

“Invalid type; couldn’t sleep.”

“Poor fellow!”

“Poor fiddlesticks!” said Mr. Wilcox, joining them. “He had the
impudence to put up notice-boards without as much as saying with your
leave or by your leave. Charles flung them down.”

“Yes, I flung them down,” said Charles modestly.

“I’ve sent a telegram after him, and a pretty sharp one, too. He, and
he in person, is responsible for the upkeep of that house for the next
three years.”

“The keys are at the farm; we wouldn’t have the keys.”

“Quite right.”

“Dolly would have taken them, but I was in, fortunately.”

“What’s Mr. Bryce like?” asked Margaret.

But nobody cared. Mr. Bryce was the tenant, who had no right to sublet;
to have defined him further was a waste of time. On his misdeeds they
descanted profusely, until the girl who had been typing the strong
letter came out with it. Mr. Wilcox added his signature. “Now we’ll be
off,” said he.

A motor-drive, a form of felicity detested by Margaret, awaited her.
Charles saw them in, civil to the last, and in a moment the offices of
the Imperial and West African Rubber Company faded away. But it was not
an impressive drive. Perhaps the weather was to blame, being grey
and banked high with weary clouds. Perhaps Hertfordshire is scarcely
intended for motorists. Did not a gentleman once motor so quickly
through Westmoreland that he missed it? and if Westmoreland can
be missed, it will fare ill with a county whose delicate structure
particularly needs the attentive eye. Hertfordshire is England at
its quietest, with little emphasis of river and hill; it is England
meditative. If Drayton were with us again to write a new edition of
his incomparable poem, he would sing the nymphs of Hertfordshire as
indeterminate of feature, with hair obfuscated by the London smoke.
Their eyes would be sad, and averted from their fate towards the
Northern flats, their leader not Isis or Sabrina, but the slowly flowing
Lea. No glory of raiment would be theirs, no urgency of dance; but they
would be real nymphs.

The chauffeur could not travel as quickly as he had hoped, for the Great
North Road was full of Easter traffic. But he went quite quick enough
for Margaret, a poor-spirited creature, who had chickens and children on
the brain.

“They’re all right,” said Mr. Wilcox. “They’ll learn--like the swallows
and the telegraph-wires.”

“Yes, but, while they’re learning--”

“The motor’s come to stay,” he answered. “One must get about. There’s a
pretty church--oh, you aren’t sharp enough. Well, look out, if the road
worries you--right outward at the scenery.”

She looked at the scenery. It heaved and merged like porridge. Presently
it congealed. They had arrived.

Charles’s house on the left; on the right the swelling forms of the
Six Hills. Their appearance in such a neighbourhood surprised her. They
interrupted the stream of residences that was thickening up towards
Hilton. Beyond them she saw meadows and a wood, and beneath them she
settled that soldiers of the best kind lay buried. She hated war and
liked soldiers--it was one of her amiable inconsistencies.

But here was Dolly, dressed up to the nines, standing at the door to
greet them, and here were the first drops of the rain. They ran in
gaily, and after a long wait in the drawing-room, sat down to the
rough-and-ready lunch, every dish of which concealed or exuded cream.
Mr. Bryce was the chief topic of conversation. Dolly described his visit
with the key, while her father-in-law gave satisfaction by chaffing her
and contradicting all she said. It was evidently the custom to laugh
at Dolly. He chaffed Margaret too, and Margaret roused from a grave
meditation was pleased and chaffed him back. Dolly seemed surprised and
eyed her curiously. After lunch the two children came down. Margaret
disliked babies, but hit it off better with the two-year-old, and sent
Dolly into fits of laughter by talking sense to him. “Kiss them now, and
come away,” said Mr. Wilcox. She came, but refused to kiss them; it
was such hard luck on the little things, she said, and though Dolly
proffered Chorly-worly and Porgly-woggles in turn, she was obdurate.

By this time it was raining steadily. The car came round with the
hood up, and again she lost all sense of space. In a few minutes they
stopped, and Crane opened the door of the car.

“What’s happened?” asked Margaret.

“What do you suppose?” said Henry.

A little porch was close up against her face.

“Are we there already?”

“We are.”

“Well, I never! In years ago it seemed so far away.”

Smiling, but somehow disillusioned, she jumped out, and her impetus
carried her to the front-door. She was about to open it, when Henry
said: “That’s no good; it’s locked. Who’s got the key?”

As he had himself forgotten to call for the key at the farm, no one
replied. He also wanted to know who had left the front gate open, since
a cow had strayed in from the road, and was spoiling the croquet lawn.
Then he said rather crossly: “Margaret, you wait in the dry. I’ll go
down for the key. It isn’t a hundred yards.”

“Mayn’t I come too?”

“No; I shall be back before I’m gone.”

Then the car turned away, and it was as if a curtain had risen. For the
second time that day she saw the appearance of the earth.

There were the greengage-trees that Helen had once described, there the
tennis lawn, there the hedge that would be glorious with dog-roses in
June, but the vision now was of black and palest green. Down by the
dell-hole more vivid colours were awakening, and Lent lilies stood
sentinel on its margin, or advanced in battalions over the grass. Tulips
were a tray of jewels. She could not see the wych-elm tree, but a branch
of the celebrated vine, studded with velvet knobs had covered the perch.
She was struck by the fertility of the soil; she had seldom been in a
garden where the flowers looked so well, and even the weeds she was idly
plucking out of the porch were intensely green. Why had poor Mr. Bryce
fled from all this beauty? For she had already decided that the place
was beautiful.

“Naughty cow! Go away!” cried Margaret to the cow, but without
indignation.

Harder came the rain, pouring out of a windless sky, and spattering up
from the notice-boards of the house-agents, which lay in a row on the
lawn where Charles had hurled them. She must have interviewed Charles in
another world--where one did have interviews. How Helen would revel in
such a notion! Charles dead, all people dead, nothing alive but houses
and gardens. The obvious dead, the intangible alive, and no connection
at all between them! Margaret smiled. Would that her own fancies were
as clear-cut! Would that she could deal as high-handedly with the world!
Smiling and sighing, she laid her hand upon the door. It opened. The
house was not locked up at all.

She hesitated. Ought she to wait for Henry? He felt strongly about
property, and might prefer to show her over himself. On the other hand,
he had told her to keep in the dry, and the porch was beginning to drip.
So she went in, and the draught from inside slammed the door behind.

Desolation greeted her. Dirty finger-prints were on the hall-windows,
flue and rubbish on its unwashed boards. The civilisation of luggage
had been here for a month, and then decamped. Dining-room and
drawing-room--right and left--were guessed only by their wallpapers.
They were just rooms where one could shelter from the rain. Across the
ceiling of each ran a great beam. The dining-room and hall revealed
theirs openly, but the drawing-room’s was match-boarded--because the
facts of life must be concealed from ladies? Drawing-room, dining-room,
and hall--how petty the names sounded! Here were simply three rooms
where children could play and friends shelter from the rain. Yes, and
they were beautiful.

Then she opened one of the doors opposite--there were two--and exchanged
wall-papers for whitewash. It was the servants’ part, though she
scarcely realised that: just rooms again, where friends might shelter.
The garden at the back was full of flowering cherries and plums. Farther
on were hints of the meadow and a black cliff of pines. Yes, the meadow
was beautiful.

Penned in by the desolate weather, she recaptured the sense of space
which the motor had tried to rob from her. She remembered again that ten
square miles are not ten times as wonderful as one square mile, that
a thousand square miles are not practically the same as heaven. The
phantom of bigness, which London encourages, was laid for ever when she
paced from the hall at Howards End to its kitchen and heard the rain run
this way and that where the watershed of the roof divided it.

Now Helen came to her mind, scrutinising half Wessex from the ridge of
the Purbeck Downs, and saying: “You will have to lose something.” She
was not so sure. For instance she would double her kingdom by opening
the door that concealed the stairs.

Now she thought of the map of Africa; of empires; of her father; of
the two supreme nations, streams of whose life warmed her blood, but,
mingling, had cooled her brain. She paced back into the hall, and as she
did so the house reverberated.

“Is that you, Henry?” she called.

There was no answer, but the house reverberated again.

“Henry, have you got in?”

But it was the heart of the house beating, faintly at first, then
loudly, martially. It dominated the rain.

It is the starved imagination, not the well-nourished, that is afraid.
Margaret flung open the door to the stairs. A noise as of drums seemed
to deafen her. A woman, an old woman, was descending, with figure erect,
with face impassive, with lips that parted and said dryly:

“Oh! Well, I took you for Ruth Wilcox.”

Margaret stammered: “I--Mrs. Wilcox--I?”

“In fancy, of course--in fancy. You had her way of walking. Good-day.”
 And the old woman passed out into the rain.



CHAPTER XXIV

“It gave her quite a turn,” said Mr. Wilcox, when retailing the incident
to Dolly at tea-time. “None of you girls have any nerves, really. Of
course, a word from me put it all right, but silly old Miss Avery--she
frightened you, didn’t she, Margaret? There you stood clutching a bunch
of weeds. She might have said something, instead of coming down the
stairs with that alarming bonnet on. I passed her as I came in. Enough
to make the car shy. I believe Miss Avery goes in for being a character;
some old maids do.” He lit a cigarette. “It is their last resource.
Heaven knows what she was doing in the place; but that’s Bryce’s
business, not mine.”

“I wasn’t as foolish as you suggest,” said Margaret “She only startled
me, for the house had been silent so long.”

“Did you take her for a spook?” asked Dolly, for whom “spooks”’ and
“going to church” summarised the unseen.

“Not exactly.”

“She really did frighten you,” said Henry, who was far from discouraging
timidity in females. “Poor Margaret! And very naturally. Uneducated
classes are so stupid.”

“Is Miss Avery uneducated classes?” Margaret asked, and found herself
looking at the decoration scheme of Dolly’s drawing-room.

“She’s just one of the crew at the farm. People like that always assume
things. She assumed you’d know who she was. She left all the Howards End
keys in the front lobby, and assumed that you’d seen them as you came
in, that you’d lock up the house when you’d done, and would bring them
on down to her. And there was her niece hunting for them down at the
farm. Lack of education makes people very casual. Hilton was full of
women like Miss Avery once.”

“I shouldn’t have disliked it, perhaps.”

“Or Miss Avery giving me a wedding present,” said Dolly.

Which was illogical but interesting. Through Dolly, Margaret was
destined to learn a good deal.

“But Charles said I must try not to mind, because she had known his
grandmother.”

“As usual, you’ve got the story wrong, my good Dorothea.”

“I meant great-grandmother--the one who left Mrs. Wilcox the house.
Weren’t both of them and Miss Avery friends when Howards End, too, was a
farm?”

Her father-in-law blew out a shaft of smoke. His attitude to his dead
wife was curious. He would allude to her, and hear her discussed, but
never mentioned her by name. Nor was he interested in the dim, bucolic
past. Dolly was--for the following reason.

“Then hadn’t Mrs. Wilcox a brother--or was it an uncle? Anyhow, he
popped the question, and Miss Avery, she said ‘No.’ Just imagine, if
she’d said ‘Yes,’ she would have been Charles’s aunt. (Oh, I say,
that’s rather good! ‘Charlie’s Aunt’! I must chaff him about that this
evening.) And the man went out and was killed. Yes, I’m certain I’ve
got it right now. Tom Howard--he was the last of them.”

“I believe so,” said Mr. Wilcox negligently.

“I say! Howards End--Howards Ended!” cried Dolly. “I’m rather on the
spot this evening, eh?”

“I wish you’d ask whether Crane’s ended.”

“Oh, Mr. Wilcox, how can you?”

“Because, if he has had enough tea, we ought to go--Dolly’s a good
little woman,” he continued, “but a little of her goes a long way. I
couldn’t live near her if you paid me.”

Margaret smiled. Though presenting a firm front to outsiders, no Wilcox
could live near, or near the possessions of, any other Wilcox. They
had the colonial spirit, and were always making for some spot where the
white man might carry his burden unobserved. Of course, Howards End was
impossible, so long as the younger couple were established in Hilton.
His objections to the house were plain as daylight now.

Crane had had enough tea, and was sent to the garage, where their car
had been trickling muddy water over Charles’s. The downpour had
surely penetrated the Six Hills by now, bringing news of our restless
civilisation. “Curious mounds,” said Henry, “but in with you now;
another time.” He had to be up in London by seven--if possible, by
six-thirty. Once more she lost the sense of space; once more trees,
houses, people, animals, hills, merged and heaved into one dirtiness,
and she was at Wickham Place.

Her evening was pleasant. The sense of flux which had haunted her
all the year disappeared for a time. She forgot the luggage and the
motor-cars, and the hurrying men who know so much and connect so little.
She recaptured the sense of space, which is the basis of all earthly
beauty, and, starting from Howards End, she attempted to realise
England. She failed--visions do not come when we try, though they may
come through trying. But an unexpected love of the island awoke in her,
connecting on this side with the joys of the flesh, on that with the
inconceivable. Helen and her father had known this love, poor Leonard
Bast was groping after it, but it had been hidden from Margaret till
this afternoon. It had certainly come through the house and old Miss
Avery. Through them: the notion of “through” persisted; her mind
trembled towards a conclusion which only the unwise have put into words.
Then, veering back into warmth, it dwelt on ruddy bricks, flowering
plum-trees, and all the tangible joys of spring.

Henry, after allaying her agitation, had taken her over his property,
and had explained to her the use and dimensions of the various rooms. He
had sketched the history of the little estate. “It is so unlucky,” ran
the monologue, “that money wasn’t put into it about fifty years ago.
Then it had four--five--times the land--thirty acres at least. One
could have made something out of it then--a small park, or at all events
shrubberies, and rebuilt the house farther away from the road. What’s
the good of taking it in hand now? Nothing but the meadow left, and even
that was heavily mortgaged when I first had to do with things--yes, and
the house too. Oh, it was no joke.” She saw two women as he spoke, one
old, the other young, watching their inheritance melt away. She saw them
greet him as a deliverer. “Mismanagement did it--besides, the days for
small farms are over. It doesn’t pay--except with intensive cultivation.
Small holdings, back to the land--ah! philanthropic bunkum. Take it as a
rule that nothing pays on a small scale. Most of the land you see (they
were standing at an upper window, the only one which faced west) belongs
to the people at the Park--they made their pile over copper--good chaps.
Avery’s Farm, Sishe’s--what they call the Common, where you see that
ruined oak--one after the other fell in, and so did this, as near as
is no matter.” But Henry had saved it as near as is no matter without fine feelings or deep insight, but he had saved it, and she loved him for the deed. “When I had more control I did what I could--sold off the two and a half
animals, and the mangy pony, and the superannuated tools; pulled down
the outhouses; drained; thinned out I don’t know how many guelder-roses
and elder-trees; and inside the house I turned the old kitchen into a
hall, and made a kitchen behind where the dairy was. Garage and so on
came later. But one could still tell it’s been an old farm. And yet
it isn’t the place that would fetch one of your artistic crew.” No, it
wasn’t; and if he did not quite understand it, the artistic crew would
still less; it was English, and the wych-elm that she saw from the
window was an English tree. No report had prepared her for its peculiar
glory. It was neither warrior, nor lover, nor god; in none of these
roles do the English excel. It was a comrade bending over the house,
strength and adventure in its roots, but in its utmost fingers
tenderness, and the girth, that a dozen men could not have spanned,
became in the end evanescent, till pale bud clusters seemed to float
in the air. It was a comrade. House and tree transcended any similes of
sex. Margaret thought of them now, and was to think of them through many
a windy night and London day, but to compare either to man, to woman,
always dwarfed the vision. Yet they kept within limits of the human.
Their message was not of eternity, but of hope on this side of the
grave. As she stood in the one, gazing at the other, truer relationship
had gleamed.

Another touch, and the account of her day is finished. They entered the
garden for a minute, and to Mr. Wilcox’s surprise she was right. Teeth,
pigs’ teeth, could be seen in the bark of the wych-elm tree--just the
white tips of them showing. “Extraordinary!” he cried. “Who told you?”

“I heard of it one winter in London,” was her answer, for she, too,
avoided mentioning Mrs. Wilcox by name.



CHAPTER XXV

Evie heard of her father’s engagement when she was in for a tennis
tournament, and her play went simply to pot. That she should marry and
leave him had seemed natural enough; that he, left alone, should do the
same was deceitful; and now Charles and Dolly said that it was all her
fault. “But I never dreamt of such a thing,” she grumbled. “Dad took
me to call now and then, and made me ask her to Simpson’s. Well, I’m
altogether off dad.” It was also an insult to their mother’s memory;
there they were agreed, and Evie had the idea of returning Mrs. Wilcox’s
lace and jewellery “as a protest.” Against what it would protest she was
not clear; but being only eighteen, the idea of renunciation appealed
to her, the more as she did not care for jewellery or lace. Dolly then
suggested that she and Uncle Percy should pretend to break off their
engagement, and then perhaps Mr. Wilcox would quarrel with Miss
Schlegel, and break off his; or Paul might be cabled for. But at this
point Charles told them not to talk nonsense. So Evie settled to marry
as soon as possible; it was no good hanging about with these Schlegels
eyeing her. The date of her wedding was consequently put forward from
September to August, and in the intoxication of presents she recovered
much of her good-humour.

Margaret found that she was expected to figure at this function, and to
figure largely; it would be such an opportunity, said Henry, for her
to get to know his set. Sir James Bidder would be there, and all the
Cahills and the Fussells, and his sister-in-law, Mrs. Warrington Wilcox,
had fortunately got back from her tour round the world. Henry she loved,
but his set promised to be another matter. He had not the knack of
surrounding himself with nice people--indeed, for a man of ability and
virtue his choice had been singularly unfortunate; he had no guiding
principle beyond a certain preference for mediocrity; he was content to
settle one of the greatest things in life haphazard, and so, while his
investments went right, his friends generally went wrong. She would be
told, “Oh, So-and-so’s a good sort--a thundering good sort,” and find,
on meeting him, that he was a brute or a bore. If Henry had shown real
affection, she would have understood, for affection explains everything.
But he seemed without sentiment. The “thundering good sort” might at
any moment become “a fellow for whom I never did have much use, and have
less now,” and be shaken off cheerily into oblivion. Margaret had done
the same as a schoolgirl. Now she never forgot any one for whom she had
once cared; she connected, though the connection might be bitter, and
she hoped that some day Henry would do the same.

Evie was not to be married from Ducie Street. She had a fancy for
something rural, and, besides, no one would be in London then, so she
left her boxes for a few weeks at Oniton Grange, and her banns were
duly published in the parish church, and for a couple of days the little
town, dreaming between the ruddy hills, was roused by the clang of our
civilisation, and drew up by the roadside to let the motors pass. Oniton
had been a discovery of Mr. Wilcox’s--a discovery of which he was not
altogether proud. It was up towards the Welsh border, and so difficult
of access that he had concluded it must be something special. A ruined
castle stood in the grounds. But having got there, what was one to do?
The shooting was bad, the fishing indifferent, and womenfolk reported
the scenery as nothing much. The place turned out to be in the wrong
part of Shropshire, and though he never ran down his own property to
others, he was only waiting to get it off his hands, and then to let
fly. Evie’s marriage was its last appearance in public. As soon as a
tenant was found, it became a house for which he never had had much use,
and had less now, and, like Howards End, faded into Limbo.

But on Margaret Oniton was destined to make a lasting impression. She
regarded it as her future home, and was anxious to start straight with
the clergy, etc., and, if possible, to see something of the local life.
It was a market-town--as tiny a one as England possesses--and had for
ages served that lonely valley, and guarded our marches against the
Celt. In spite of the occasion, in spite of the numbing hilarity that
greeted her as soon as she got into the reserved saloon at Paddington,
her senses were awake and watching, and though Oniton was to prove one
of her innumerable false starts, she never forgot it, or the things that
happened there.

The London party only numbered eight--the Fussells, father and son,
two Anglo-Indian ladies named Mrs. Plynlimmon and Lady Edser, Mrs.
Warrington Wilcox and her daughter, and, lastly, the little girl,
very smart and quiet, who figures at so many weddings, and who kept a
watchful eye on Margaret, the bride-elect. Dolly was absent--a domestic
event detained her at Hilton; Paul had cabled a humorous message;
Charles was to meet them with a trio of motors at Shrewsbury; Helen had
refused her invitation; Tibby had never answered his. The management was
excellent, as was to be expected with anything that Henry undertook; one
was conscious of his sensible and generous brain in the background. They
were his guests as soon as they reached the train; a special label
for their luggage; a courier; a special lunch; they had only to look
pleasant and, where possible, pretty. Margaret thought with dismay
of her own nuptials--presumably under the management of Tibby. “Mr.
Theobald Schlegel and Miss Helen Schlegel request the pleasure of Mrs.
Plynlimmon’s company on the occasion of the marriage of their sister
Margaret.” The formula was incredible, but it must soon be printed and
sent, and though Wickham Place need not compete with Oniton, it must
feed its guests properly, and provide them with sufficient chairs. Her
wedding would either be ramshackly or bourgeois--she hoped the latter.
Such an affair as the present, staged with a deftness that was almost
beautiful, lay beyond her powers and those of her friends.

The low rich purr of a Great Western express is not the worst background
for conversation, and the journey passed pleasantly enough. Nothing
could have exceeded the kindness of the two men. They raised windows
for some ladies, and lowered them for others, they rang the bell for the
servant, they identified the colleges as the train slipped past Oxford,
they caught books or bag-purses in the act of tumbling on to the floor.
Yet there was nothing finicking about their politeness--it had the
public-school touch, and, though sedulous, was virile. More battles than
Waterloo have been won on our playing-fields, and Margaret bowed to a
charm of which she did not wholly approve, and said nothing when the
Oxford colleges were identified wrongly. “Male and female created He
them”; the journey to Shrewsbury confirmed this questionable statement,
and the long glass saloon, that moved so easily and felt so comfortable,
became a forcing-house for the idea of sex.

At Shrewsbury came fresh air. Margaret was all for sight-seeing, and
while the others were finishing their tea at the Raven, she annexed a
motor and hurried over the astonishing city. Her chauffeur was not
the faithful Crane, but an Italian, who dearly loved making her late.
Charles, watch in hand, though with a level brow, was standing in front
of the hotel when they returned. It was perfectly all right, he
told her; she was by no means the last. And then he dived into the
coffee-room, and she heard him say, “For God’s sake, hurry the women up;
we shall never be off,” and Albert Fussell reply, “Not I; I’ve done
my share,” and Colonel Fussell opine that the ladies were getting
themselves up to kill. Presently Myra (Mrs. Warrington’s daughter)
appeared, and as she was his cousin, Charles blew her up a little; she
had been changing her smart travelling hat for a smart motor hat. Then
Mrs. Warrington herself, leading the quiet child; the two Anglo-Indian
ladies were always last. Maids, courier, heavy luggage, had already
gone on by a branch-line to a station nearer Oniton, but there were five
hat-boxes and four dressing-bags to be packed, and five dust-cloaks
to be put on, and to be put off at the last moment, because Charles
declared them not necessary. The men presided over everything with
unfailing good-humour. By half-past five the party was ready, and went
out of Shrewsbury by the Welsh Bridge.

Shropshire had not the reticence of Hertfordshire. Though robbed of half
its magic by swift movement, it still conveyed the sense of hills. They
were nearing the buttresses that force the Severn eastward and make it
an English stream, and the sun, sinking over the Sentinels of Wales,
was straight in their eyes. Having picked up another guest, they
turned southward, avoiding the greater mountains, but conscious of an
occasional summit, rounded and mild, whose colouring differed in quality
from that of the lower earth, and whose contours altered more slowly.
Quiet mysteries were in progress behind those tossing horizons: the
West, as ever, was retreating with some secret which may not be worth
the discovery, but which no practical man will ever discover.

They spoke of Tariff Reform.

Mrs. Warrington was just back from the Colonies. Like many other critics
of Empire, her mouth had been stopped with food, and she could only
exclaim at the hospitality with which she had been received, and warn
the Mother Country against trifling with young Titans. “They threaten to
cut the painter,” she cried, “and where shall we be then? Miss Schlegel,
you’ll undertake to keep Henry sound about Tariff Reform? It is our last
hope.”

Margaret playfully confessed herself on the other side, and they began
to quote from their respective handbooks while the motor carried them
deep into the hills. Curious these were rather than impressive, for
their outlines lacked beauty, and the pink fields on their summits
suggested the handkerchiefs of a giant spread out to dry. An occasional
outcrop of rock, an occasional wood, an occasional “forest,” treeless
and brown, all hinted at wildness to follow, but the main colour was an
agricultural green. The air grew cooler; they had surmounted the last
gradient, and Oniton lay below them with its church, its radiating
houses, its castle, its river-girt peninsula. Close to the castle was
a grey mansion unintellectual but kindly, stretching with its grounds
across the peninsula’s neck--the sort of mansion that was built all over
England in the beginning of the last century, while architecture was
still an expression of the national character. That was the Grange,
remarked Albert, over his shoulder, and then he jammed the brake on, and
the motor slowed down and stopped. “I’m sorry,” said he, turning round.
“Do you mind getting out--by the door on the right. Steady on.”

“What’s happened?” asked Mrs. Warrington.

Then the car behind them drew up, and the voice of Charles was heard
saying: “Get the women out at once.” There was a concourse of males,
and Margaret and her companions were hustled out and received into the
second car. What had happened? As it started off again, the door of a
cottage opened, and a girl screamed wildly at them.

“What is it?” the ladies cried.

Charles drove them a hundred yards without speaking. Then he said: “It’s
all right. Your car just touched a dog.”

“But stop!” cried Margaret, horrified.

“It didn’t hurt him.”

“Didn’t really hurt him?” asked Myra.

“No.”

“Do PLEASE stop!” said Margaret, leaning forward. She was standing up in
the car, the other occupants holding her knees to steady her. “I want to
go back, please.”

Charles took no notice.

“We’ve left Mr. Fussell behind,” said another; “and Angelo, and Crane.”

“Yes, but no woman.”

“I expect a little of”--Mrs. Warrington scratched her palm--“will be
more to the point than one of us!”

“The insurance company see to that,” remarked Charles, “and Albert will
do the talking.”

“I want to go back, though, I say!” repeated Margaret, getting angry.

Charles took no notice. The motor, loaded with refugees, continued to
travel very slowly down the hill. “The men are there,” chorused the
others. “They will see to it.”

“The men CAN’T see to it. Oh, this is ridiculous! Charles, I ask you to
stop.”

“Stopping’s no good,” drawled Charles.

“Isn’t it?” said Margaret, and jumped straight out of the car. She fell
on her knees, cut her gloves, shook her hat over her ear. Cries of alarm
followed her. “You’ve hurt yourself,” exclaimed Charles, jumping after
her.

“Of course I’ve hurt myself!” she retorted.

“May I ask what--”

“There’s nothing to ask,” said Margaret.

“Your hand’s bleeding.”

“I know.”

“I’m in for a frightful row from the pater.”

“You should have thought of that sooner, Charles.”

Charles had never been in such a position before. It was a woman in
revolt who was hobbling away from him--and the sight was too strange to
leave any room for anger. He recovered himself when the others caught
them up: their sort he understood. He commanded them to go back.

Albert Fussell was seen walking towards them.

“It’s all right!” he called. “It was a cat.”

“There!” exclaimed Charles triumphantly. “It’s only a rotten cat.”

“Got room in your car for a little un? I cut as soon as I saw it wasn’t
a dog; the chauffeurs are tackling the girl.” But Margaret walked
forward steadily. Why should the chauffeurs tackle the girl? Ladies
sheltering behind men, men sheltering behind servants--the whole
system’s wrong, and she must challenge it.

“Miss Schlegel! ’Pon my word, you’ve hurt your hand.”

“I’m just going to see,” said Margaret. “Don’t you wait, Mr. Fussell.”

The second motor came round the corner. “It is all right, madam,” said
Crane in his turn. He had taken to calling her madam.

“What’s all right? The cat?”

“Yes, madam. The girl will receive compensation for it.”

“She was a very ruda girla,” said Angelo from the third motor
thoughtfully.

“Wouldn’t you have been rude?”

The Italian spread out his hands, implying that he had not thought of
rudeness, but would produce it if it pleased her. The situation became
absurd. The gentlemen were again buzzing round Miss Schlegel with offers
of assistance, and Lady Edser began to bind up her hand. She yielded,
apologising slightly, and was led back to the car, and soon the
landscape resumed its motion, the lonely cottage disappeared, the castle
swelled on its cushion of turf, and they had arrived. No doubt she had
disgraced herself. But she felt their whole journey from London had
been unreal. They had no part with the earth and its emotions. They were
dust, and a stink, and cosmopolitan chatter, and the girl whose cat had
been killed had lived more deeply than they.

“Oh, Henry,” she exclaimed, “I have been so naughty,” for she had
decided to take up this line. “We ran over a cat. Charles told me not to
jump out, but I would, and look!” She held out her bandaged hand. “Your
poor Meg went such a flop.”

Mr. Wilcox looked bewildered. In evening dress, he was standing to
welcome his guests in the hall.

“Thinking it was a dog,” added Mrs. Warrington.

“Ah, a dog’s a companion!” said Colonel Fussell. “A dog’ll remember you.”

“Have you hurt yourself, Margaret?”

“Not to speak about; and it’s my left hand.”

“Well, hurry up and change.”

She obeyed, as did the others. Mr. Wilcox then turned to his son.

“Now, Charles, what’s happened?”

Charles was absolutely honest. He described what he believed to have
happened. Albert had flattened out a cat, and Miss Schlegel had lost her
nerve, as any woman might. She had been got safely into the other car,
but when it was in motion had leapt out again, in spite of all that they
could say. After walking a little on the road, she had calmed down and
had said that she was sorry. His father accepted this explanation, and
neither knew that Margaret had artfully prepared the way for it.
It fitted in too well with their view of feminine nature. In the
smoking-room, after dinner, the Colonel put forward the view that Miss
Schlegel had jumped it out of devilry. Well he remembered as a young
man, in the harbour of Gibraltar once, how a girl--a handsome girl,
too--had jumped overboard for a bet. He could see her now, and all the
lads overboard after her. But Charles and Mr. Wilcox agreed it was much
more probably nerves in Miss Schlegel’s case. Charles was depressed.
That woman had a tongue. She would bring worse disgrace on his father
before she had done with them. He strolled out on to the castle mound to
think the matter over. The evening was exquisite. On three sides of him
a little river whispered, full of messages from the West; above his head
the ruins made patterns against the sky. He carefully reviewed their
dealings with this family, until he fitted Helen, and Margaret, and Aunt
Juley into an orderly conspiracy. Paternity had made him suspicious.
He had two children to look after, and more coming, and day by day
they seemed less likely to grow up rich men. “It is all very well,”
 he reflected, “the pater’s saying that he will be just to all, but one
can’t be just indefinitely. Money isn’t elastic. What’s to happen if
Evie has a family? And, come to that, so may the pater. There’ll not be
enough to go round, for there’s none coming in, either through Dolly or
Percy. It’s damnable!” He looked enviously at the Grange, whose windows
poured light and laughter. First and last, this wedding would cost a
pretty penny. Two ladies were strolling up and down the garden terrace,
and as the syllables “Imperialism” were wafted to his ears, he guessed
that one of them was his aunt. She might have helped him, if she too had
not had a family to provide for. “Every one for himself,” he repeated--a
maxim which had cheered him in the past, but which rang grimly enough
among the ruins of Oniton. He lacked his father’s ability in business,
and so had an ever higher regard for money; unless he could inherit
plenty, he feared to leave his children poor.

As he sat thinking, one of the ladies left the terrace and walked into
the meadow; he recognised her as Margaret by the white bandage that
gleamed on her arm, and put out his cigar, lest the gleam should betray
him. She climbed up the mound in zigzags, and at times stooped down, as
if she was stroking the turf. It sounds absolutely incredible, but for
a moment Charles thought that she was in love with him, and had come out
to tempt him. Charles believed in temptresses, who are indeed the strong
man’s necessary complement, and having no sense of humour, he could not
purge himself of the thought by a smile. Margaret, who was engaged to
his father, and his sister’s wedding-guest, kept on her way without
noticing him, and he admitted that he had wronged her on this point. But
what was she doing? Why was she stumbling about amongst the rubble and
catching her dress in brambles and burrs? As she edged round the
keep, she must have got to windward and smelt his cigar-smoke, for she
exclaimed, “Hullo! Who’s that?”

Charles made no answer.

“Saxon or Celt?” she continued, laughing in the darkness. “But it
doesn’t matter. Whichever you are, you will have to listen to me. I love
this place. I love Shropshire. I hate London. I am glad that this will
be my home. Ah, dear”--she was now moving back towards the house--“what
a comfort to have arrived!”

“That woman means mischief,” thought Charles, and compressed his lips.
In a few minutes he followed her indoors, as the ground was getting
damp. Mists were rising from the river, and presently it became
invisible, though it whispered more loudly. There had been a heavy
downpour in the Welsh hills.



CHAPTER XXVI

Next morning a fine mist covered the peninsula. The weather promised
well, and the outline of the castle mound grew clearer each moment that
Margaret watched it. Presently she saw the keep, and the sun painted
the rubble gold, and charged the white sky with blue. The shadow of the
house gathered itself together, and fell over the garden. A cat looked
up at her window and mewed. Lastly the river appeared, still holding the
mists between its banks and its overhanging alders, and only visible as
far as a hill, which cut off its upper reaches.

Margaret was fascinated by Oniton. She had said that she loved it, but
it was rather its romantic tension that held her. The rounded Druids of
whom she had caught glimpses in her drive, the rivers hurrying down
from them to England, the carelessly modelled masses of the lower hills,
thrilled her with poetry. The house was insignificant, but the prospect
from it would be an eternal joy, and she thought of all the friends she
would have to stop in it, and of the conversion of Henry himself to a
rural life. Society, too, promised favourably. The rector of the parish
had dined with them last night, and she found that he was a friend of
her father’s, and so knew what to find in her. She liked him. He would
introduce her to the town. While, on her other side, Sir James Bidder
sat, repeating that she only had to give the word, and he would whip up
the county families for twenty miles round. Whether Sir James, who was
Garden Seeds, had promised what he could perform, she doubted, but so
long as Henry mistook them for the county families when they did call,
she was content.

Charles Wilcox and Albert Fussell now crossed the lawn. They were going
for a morning dip, and a servant followed them with their bathing-suits.
She had meant to take a stroll herself before breakfast, but saw that
the day was still sacred to men, and amused herself by watching their
contretemps. In the first place the key of the bathing-shed could not be
found. Charles stood by the riverside with folded hands, tragical, while
the servant shouted, and was misunderstood by another servant in the
garden. Then came a difficulty about a springboard, and soon three
people were running backwards and forwards over the meadow, with orders
and counter orders and recriminations and apologies. If Margaret wanted
to jump from a motor-car, she jumped; if Tibby thought paddling would
benefit his ankles, he paddled; if a clerk desired adventure, he took
a walk in the dark. But these athletes seemed paralysed. They could not
bathe without their appliances, though the morning sun was calling and
the last mists were rising from the dimpling stream. Had they found
the life of the body after all? Could not the men whom they despised as
milksops beat them, even on their own ground?

She thought of the bathing arrangements as they should be in her day--no
worrying of servants, no appliances, beyond good sense. Her reflections
were disturbed by the quiet child, who had come out to speak to the
cat, but was now watching her watch the men. She called, “Good-morning,
dear,” a little sharply. Her voice spread consternation. Charles looked
round, and though completely attired in indigo blue, vanished into the
shed, and was seen no more.

“Miss Wilcox is up--” the child whispered, and then became
unintelligible.

“What is that?” it sounded like, “--cut-yoke--sack-back--”

“I can’t hear.”

“--On the bed--tissue-paper--”

Gathering that the wedding-dress was on view, and that a visit would
be seemly, she went to Evie’s room. All was hilarity here. Evie, in a
petticoat, was dancing with one of the Anglo-Indian ladies, while the
other was adoring yards of white satin. They screamed, they laughed,
they sang, and the dog barked.

Margaret screamed a little too, but without conviction. She could not
feel that a wedding was so funny. Perhaps something was missing in her
equipment.

Evie gasped: “Dolly is a rotter not to be here! Oh, we would rag just
then!” Then Margaret went down to breakfast.

Henry was already installed; he ate slowly and spoke little, and was,
in Margaret’s eyes, the only member of their party who dodged emotion
successfully. She could not suppose him indifferent either to the loss
of his daughter or to the presence of his future wife. Yet he dwelt
intact, only issuing orders occasionally--orders that promoted the
comfort of his guests. He inquired after her hand; he set her to pour
out the coffee and Mrs. Warrington to pour out the tea. When Evie came
down there was a moment’s awkwardness, and both ladies rose to vacate
their places. “Burton,” called Henry, “serve tea and coffee from the
sideboard!” It wasn’t genuine tact, but it was tact, of a sort--the
sort that is as useful as the genuine, and saves even more situations at
Board meetings. Henry treated a marriage like a funeral, item by item,
never raising his eyes to the whole, and “Death, where is thy sting?
Love, where is thy victory?” one would exclaim at the close.

After breakfast Margaret claimed a few words with him. It was always
best to approach him formally. She asked for the interview, because he
was going on to shoot grouse to-morrow, and she was returning to Helen
in town.

“Certainly, dear,” said he. “Of course, I have the time. What do you
want?”

“Nothing.”

“I was afraid something had gone wrong.”

“No; I have nothing to say, but you may talk.”

Glancing at his watch, he talked of the nasty curve at the lych-gate.
She heard him with interest. Her surface could always respond to his
without contempt, though all her deeper being might be yearning to help
him. She had abandoned any plan of action. Love is the best, and the
more she let herself love him, the more chance was there that he would
set his soul in order. Such a moment as this, when they sat under fair
weather by the walks of their future home, was so sweet to her that
its sweetness would surely pierce to him. Each lift of his eyes, each
parting of the thatched lip from the clean-shaven, must prelude
the tenderness that kills the Monk and the Beast at a single blow.
Disappointed a hundred times, she still hoped. She loved him with too
clear a vision to fear his cloudiness. Whether he droned trivialities,
as to-day, or sprang kisses on her in the twilight, she could pardon
him, she could respond.

“If there is this nasty curve,” she suggested, “couldn’t we walk to the
church? Not, of course, you and Evie; but the rest of us might very well
go on first, and that would mean fewer carriages.”

“One can’t have ladies walking through the Market Square. The Fussells
wouldn’t like it; they were awfully particular at Charles’s wedding.
My--she--our party was anxious to walk, and certainly the church was
just round the corner, and I shouldn’t have minded; but the Colonel made
a great point of it.”

“You men shouldn’t be so chivalrous,” said Margaret thoughtfully.

“Why not?”

She knew why not, but said that she did not know. He then announced
that, unless she had anything special to say, he must visit the
wine-cellar, and they went off together in search of Burton. Though
clumsy and a little inconvenient, Oniton was a genuine country-house.
They clattered down flagged passages, looking into room after room,
and scaring unknown maids from the performance of obscure duties. The
wedding-breakfast must be in readiness when they come back from church,
and tea would be served in the garden. The sight of so many agitated
and serious people made Margaret smile, but she reflected that they
were paid to be serious, and enjoyed being agitated. Here were the lower
wheels of the machine that was tossing Evie up into nuptial glory. A
little boy blocked their way with pig-pails. His mind could not grasp
their greatness, and he said: “By your leave; let me pass, please.”
 Henry asked him where Burton was. But the servants were so new that they
did not know one another’s names. In the still-room sat the band, who
had stipulated for champagne as part of their fee, and who were already
drinking beer. Scents of Araby came from the kitchen, mingled with
cries. Margaret knew what had happened there, for it happened at Wickham
Place. One of the wedding dishes had boiled over, and the cook was
throwing cedar-shavings to hide the smell. At last they came upon
the butler. Henry gave him the keys, and handed Margaret down the
cellar-stairs. Two doors were unlocked. She, who kept all her wine at
the bottom of the linen-cupboard, was astonished at the sight. “We shall
never get through it!” she cried, and the two men were suddenly drawn
into brotherhood, and exchanged smiles. She felt as if she had again
jumped out of the car while it was moving.

Certainly Oniton would take some digesting. It would be no small
business to remain herself, and yet to assimilate such an establishment.
She must remain herself, for his sake as well as her own, since a
shadowy wife degrades the husband whom she accompanies; and she must
assimilate for reasons of common honesty, since she had no right to
marry a man and make him uncomfortable. Her only ally was the power of
Home. The loss of Wickham Place had taught her more than its possession.
Howards End had repeated the lesson. She was determined to create new
sanctities among these hills.

After visiting the wine-cellar, she dressed, and then came the wedding,
which seemed a small affair when compared with the preparations for it.
Everything went like one o’clock. Mr. Cahill materialised out of space,
and was waiting for his bride at the church door. No one dropped the
ring or mispronounced the responses, or trod on Evie’s train, or cried.
In a few minutes the clergymen performed their duty, the register was
signed, and they were back in their carriages, negotiating the dangerous
curve by the lych-gate. Margaret was convinced that they had not been
married at all, and that the Norman church had been intent all the time
on other business.

There were more documents to sign at the house, and the breakfast to
eat, and then a few more people dropped in for the garden party. There
had been a great many refusals, and after all it was not a very big
affair--not as big as Margaret’s would be. She noted the dishes and
the strips of red carpet, that outwardly she might give Henry what was
proper. But inwardly she hoped for something better than this blend of
Sunday church and fox-hunting. If only some one had been upset! But this
wedding had gone off so particularly well--“quite like a durbar” in the
opinion of Lady Edser, and she thoroughly agreed with her.

So the wasted day lumbered forward, the bride and bridegroom drove off,
yelling with laughter, and for the second time the sun retreated towards
the hills of Wales. Henry, who was more tired than he owned, came up to
her in the castle meadow, and, in tones of unusual softness, said that
he was pleased. Everything had gone off so well. She felt that he was
praising her, too, and blushed; certainly she had done all she could
with his intractable friends, and had made a special point of kotowing
to the men. They were breaking camp this evening; only the Warringtons
and quiet child would stay the night, and the others were already moving
towards the house to finish their packing. “I think it did go off
well,” she agreed. “Since I had to jump out of the motor, I’m thankful I
lighted on my left hand. I am so very glad about it, Henry dear; I only
hope that the guests at ours may be half as comfortable. You must all
remember that we have no practical person among us, except my aunt, and
she is not used to entertainments on a large scale.”

“I know,” he said gravely. “Under the circumstances, it would be better
to put everything into the hands of Harrods or Whiteley’s, or even to go
to some hotel.”

“You desire a hotel?”

“Yes, because--well, I mustn’t interfere with you. No doubt you want to
be married from your old home.”

“My old home’s falling into pieces, Henry. I only want my new. Isn’t it
a perfect evening--”

“The Alexandrina isn’t bad--”

“The Alexandrina,” she echoed, more occupied with the threads of smoke
that were issuing from their chimneys, and ruling the sunlit slopes with
parallels of grey.

“It’s off Curzon Street.”

“Is it? Let’s be married from off Curzon Street.”

Then she turned westward, to gaze at the swirling gold. Just where the
river rounded the hill the sun caught it. Fairyland must lie above the
bend, and its precious liquid was pouring towards them past Charles’s
bathing-shed. She gazed so long that her eyes were dazzled, and when
they moved back to the house, she could not recognise the faces of
people who were coming out of it. A parlour-maid was preceding them.

“Who are those people?” she asked.

“They’re callers!” exclaimed Henry. “It’s too late for callers.”

“Perhaps they’re town people who want to see the wedding presents.”

“I’m not at home yet to townees.”

“Well, hide among the ruins, and if I can stop them, I will.”

He thanked her.

Margaret went forward, smiling socially. She supposed that these were
unpunctual guests, who would have to be content with vicarious civility,
since Evie and Charles were gone, Henry tired, and the others in their
rooms. She assumed the airs of a hostess; not for long. For one of the
group was Helen--Helen in her oldest clothes, and dominated by that
tense, wounding excitement that had made her a terror in their nursery
days.

“What is it?” she called. “Oh, what’s wrong? Is Tibby ill?”

Helen spoke to her two companions, who fell back. Then she bore forward
furiously.

“They’re starving!” she shouted. “I found them starving!”

“Who? Why have you come?”

“The Basts.”

“Oh, Helen!” moaned Margaret. “Whatever have you done now?”

“He has lost his place. He has been turned out of his bank. Yes, he’s
done for. We upper classes have ruined him, and I suppose you’ll tell
me it’s the battle of life. Starving. His wife is ill. Starving. She
fainted in the train.”

“Helen, are you mad?”

“Perhaps. Yes. If you like, I’m mad. But I’ve brought them. I’ll stand
injustice no longer. I’ll show up the wretchedness that lies under this
luxury, this talk of impersonal forces, this cant about God doing what
we’re too slack to do ourselves.”

“Have you actually brought two starving people from London to
Shropshire, Helen?”

Helen was checked. She had not thought of this, and her hysteria abated.
“There was a restaurant car on the train,” she said.

“Don’t be absurd. They aren’t starving, and you know it. Now, begin from
the beginning. I won’t have such theatrical nonsense. How dare you! Yes,
how dare you!” she repeated, as anger filled her, “bursting in to Evie’s
wedding in this heartless way. My goodness! but you’ve a perverted
notion of philanthropy. Look”--she indicated the house--“servants,
people out of the windows. They think it’s some vulgar scandal, and
I must explain, ‘Oh no, it’s only my sister screaming, and only two
hangers-on of ours, whom she has brought here for no conceivable
reason.’”

“Kindly take back that word ‘hangers-on,’” said Helen, ominously calm.

“Very well,” conceded Margaret, who for all her wrath was determined to
avoid a real quarrel. “I, too, am sorry about them, but it beats me why
you’ve brought them here, or why you’re here yourself.”

“It’s our last chance of seeing Mr. Wilcox.”

Margaret moved towards the house at this. She was determined not to
worry Henry.

“He’s going to Scotland. I know he is. I insist on seeing him.”

“Yes, to-morrow.”

“I knew it was our last chance.”

“How do you do, Mr. Bast?” said Margaret, trying to control her voice.
“This is an odd business. What view do you take of it?”

“There is Mrs. Bast, too,” prompted Helen.

Jacky also shook hands. She, like her husband, was shy, and,
furthermore, ill, and furthermore, so bestially stupid that she could
not grasp what was happening. She only knew that the lady had swept down
like a whirlwind last night, had paid the rent, redeemed the furniture,
provided them with a dinner and a breakfast, and ordered them to meet
her at Paddington next morning. Leonard had feebly protested, and when
the morning came, had suggested that they shouldn’t go. But she, half
mesmerised, had obeyed. The lady had told them to, and they must, and
their bed-sitting-room had accordingly changed into Paddington, and
Paddington into a railway carriage, that shook, and grew hot, and grew
cold, and vanished entirely, and reappeared amid torrents of expensive
scent. “You have fainted,” said the lady in an awe-struck voice.
“Perhaps the air will do you good.” And perhaps it had, for here she
was, feeling rather better among a lot of flowers.

“I’m sure I don’t want to intrude,” began Leonard, in answer to
Margaret’s question. “But you have been so kind to me in the past
in warning me about the Porphyrion that I wondered--why, I wondered
whether--”

“Whether we could get him back into the Porphyrion again,” supplied
Helen. “Meg, this has been a cheerful business. A bright evening’s work
that was on Chelsea Embankment.”

Margaret shook her head and returned to Mr. Bast.

“I don’t understand. You left the Porphyrion because we suggested it was
a bad concern, didn’t you?”

“That’s right.”

“And went into a bank instead?”

“I told you all that,” said Helen; “and they reduced their staff after
he had been in a month, and now he’s penniless, and I consider that we
and our informant are directly to blame.”

“I hate all this,” Leonard muttered.

“I hope you do, Mr. Bast. But it’s no good mincing matters. You have
done yourself no good by coming here. If you intend to confront Mr.
Wilcox, and to call him to account for a chance remark, you will make a
very great mistake.”

“I brought them. I did it all,” cried Helen.

“I can only advise you to go at once. My sister has put you in a false
position, and it is kindest to tell you so. It’s too late to get to
town, but you’ll find a comfortable hotel in Oniton, where Mrs. Bast can
rest, and I hope you’ll be my guests there.”

“That isn’t what I want, Miss Schlegel,” said Leonard. “You’re very
kind, and no doubt it’s a false position, but you make me miserable. I
seem no good at all.”

“It’s work he wants,” interpreted Helen. “Can’t you see?”

Then he said: “Jacky, let’s go. We’re more bother than we’re worth.
We’re costing these ladies pounds and pounds already to get work for us,
and they never will. There’s nothing we’re good enough to do.”

“We would like to find you work,” said Margaret rather conventionally.
“We want to--I, like my sister. You’re only down in your luck. Go to the
hotel, have a good night’s rest, and some day you shall pay me back the
bill, if you prefer it.”

But Leonard was near the abyss, and at such moments men see clearly.
“You don’t know what you’re talking about,” he said. “I shall never get
work now. If rich people fail at one profession, they can try another.
Not I. I had my groove, and I’ve got out of it. I could do one
particular branch of insurance in one particular office well enough to
command a salary, but that’s all. Poetry’s nothing, Miss Schlegel. One’s
thoughts about this and that are nothing. Your money, too, is nothing,
if you’ll understand me. I mean if a man over twenty once loses his own
particular job, it’s all over with him. I have seen it happen to others.
Their friends gave them money for a little, but in the end they fall
over the edge. It’s no good. It’s the whole world pulling. There always
will be rich and poor.”

He ceased. “Won’t you have something to eat?” said Margaret. “I don’t
know what to do. It isn’t my house, and though Mr. Wilcox would have
been glad to see you at any other time--as I say, I don’t know what
to do, but I undertake to do what I can for you. Helen, offer them
something. Do try a sandwich, Mrs. Bast.”

They moved to a long table behind which a servant was still standing.
Iced cakes, sandwiches innumerable, coffee, claret-cup, champagne,
remained almost intact; their overfed guests could do no more. Leonard
refused. Jacky thought she could manage a little. Margaret left them
whispering together, and had a few more words with Helen.

She said: “Helen, I like Mr. Bast. I agree that he’s worth helping. I
agree that we are directly responsible.”

“No, indirectly. Via Mr. Wilcox.”

“Let me tell you once for all that if you take up that attitude, I’ll
do nothing. No doubt you’re right logically, and are entitled to say
a great many scathing things about Henry. Only, I won’t have it. So
choose.”

Helen looked at the sunset.

“If you promise to take them quietly to the George I will speak to Henry
about them--in my own way, mind; there is to be none of this absurd
screaming about justice. I have no use for justice. If it was only a
question of money, we could do it ourselves. But he wants work, and that
we can’t give him, but possibly Henry can.”

“It’s his duty to,” grumbled Helen.

“Nor am I concerned with duty. I’m concerned with the characters of
various people whom we know, and how, things being as they are, things
may be made a little better. Mr. Wilcox hates being asked favours; all
business men do. But I am going to ask him, at the risk of a rebuff,
because I want to make things a little better.”

“Very well. I promise. You take it very calmly.”

“Take them off to the George, then, and I’ll try. Poor creatures! but
they look tired.” As they parted, she added: “I haven’t nearly done with
you, though, Helen. You have been most self-indulgent. I can’t get over
it. You have less restraint rather than more as you grow older. Think it
over and alter yourself, or we shan’t have happy lives.”

She rejoined Henry. Fortunately he had been sitting down: these physical
matters were important. “Was it townees?” he asked, greeting her with a
pleasant smile.

“You’ll never believe me,” said Margaret, sitting down beside him. “It’s
all right now, but it was my sister.”

“Helen here?” he cried, preparing to rise. “But she refused the
invitation. I thought hated weddings.”

“Don’t get up. She has not come to the wedding. I’ve bundled her off to
the George.”

Inherently hospitable, he protested.

“No; she has two of her proteges with her and must keep with them.”

“Let ’em all come.”

“My dear Henry, did you see them?”

“I did catch sight of a brown bunch of a woman, certainly.”

“The brown bunch was Helen, but did you catch sight of a sea-green and
salmon bunch?”

“What! are they out bean-feasting?”

“No; business. They wanted to see me, and later on I want to talk to you
about them.”

She was ashamed of her own diplomacy. In dealing with a Wilcox, how
tempting it was to lapse from comradeship, and to give him the kind of
woman that he desired! Henry took the hint at once, and said: “Why later
on? Tell me now. No time like the present.”

“Shall I?”

“If it isn’t a long story.”

“Oh, not five minutes; but there’s a sting at the end of it, for I want
you to find the man some work in your office.”

“What are his qualifications?”

“I don’t know. He’s a clerk.”

“How old?”

“Twenty-five, perhaps.”

“What’s his name?”

“Bast,” said Margaret, and was about to remind him that they had met
at Wickham Place, but stopped herself. It had not been a successful
meeting.

“Where was he before?”

“Dempster’s Bank.”

“Why did he leave?” he asked, still remembering nothing.

“They reduced their staff.”

“All right; I’ll see him.”

It was the reward of her tact and devotion through the day. Now she
understood why some women prefer influence to rights. Mrs. Plynlimmon,
when condemning suffragettes, had said: “The woman who can’t influence
her husband to vote the way she wants ought to be ashamed of herself.”
 Margaret had winced, but she was influencing Henry now, and though
pleased at her little victory, she knew that she had won it by the
methods of the harem.

“I should be glad if you took him,” she said, “but I don’t know whether
he’s qualified.”

“I’ll do what I can. But, Margaret, this mustn’t be taken as a
precedent.”

“No, of course--of course--”

“I can’t fit in your proteges every day. Business would suffer.”

“I can promise you he’s the last. He--he’s rather a special case.”

“Proteges always are.”

She let it stand at that. He rose with a little extra touch of
complacency, and held out his hand to help her up. How wide the gulf
between Henry as he was and Henry as Helen thought he ought to be! And
she herself--hovering as usual between the two, now accepting men as
they are, now yearning with her sister for Truth. Love and Truth--their
warfare seems eternal. Perhaps the whole visible world rests on it,
and if they were one, life itself, like the spirits when Prospero was
reconciled to his brother, might vanish into air, into thin air.

“Your protege has made us late,” said he. “The Fussells--will just be
starting.”

On the whole she sided with men as they are. Henry would save the Basts
as he had saved Howards End, while Helen and her friends were discussing
the ethics of salvation. His was a slap-dash method, but the world has
been built slap-dash, and the beauty of mountain and river and sunset
may be but the varnish with which the unskilled artificer hides his
joins. Oniton, like herself, was imperfect. Its apple-trees were
stunted, its castle ruinous. It, too, had suffered in the border warfare
between the Anglo-Saxon and the Celt, between things as they are and
as they ought to be. Once more the west was retreating, once again the
orderly stars were dotting the eastern sky. There is certainly no rest
for us on the earth. But there is happiness, and as Margaret descended
the mound on her lover’s arm, she felt that she was having her share.

To her annoyance, Mrs. Bast was still in the garden; the husband and
Helen had left her there to finish her meal while they went to engage
rooms. Margaret found this woman repellent. She had felt, when shaking
her hand, an overpowering shame. She remembered the motive of her call
at Wickham Place, and smelt again odours from the abyss--odours the more
disturbing because they were involuntary. For there was no malice in
Jacky. There she sat, a piece of cake in one hand, an empty champagne
glass in the other, doing no harm to anybody.

“She’s overtired,” Margaret whispered.

“She’s something else,” said Henry. “This won’t do. I can’t have her in
my garden in this state.”

“Is she--” Margaret hesitated to add “drunk.” Now that she was going
to marry him, he had grown particular. He discountenanced risque
conversations now.

Henry went up to the woman. She raised her face, which gleamed in the
twilight like a puff-ball.

“Madam, you will be more comfortable at the hotel,” he said sharply.

Jacky replied: “If it isn’t Hen!”

“Ne crois pas que le mari lui ressemble,” apologised Margaret. “Il est
tout à fait différent.”

“Henry!” she repeated, quite distinctly.

Mr. Wilcox was much annoyed. “I congratulate you on your proteges,” he
remarked.

“Hen, don’t go. You do love me, dear, don’t you?”

“Bless us, what a person!” sighed Margaret, gathering up her skirts.

Jacky pointed with her cake. “You’re a nice boy, you are.” She yawned.
“There now, I love you.”

“Henry, I am awfully sorry.”

“And pray why?” he asked, and looked at her so sternly that she feared
he was ill. He seemed more scandalised than the facts demanded.

“To have brought this down on you.”

“Pray don’t apologise.”

The voice continued.

“Why does she call you ‘Hen’?” said Margaret innocently. “Has she ever
seen you before?”

“Seen Hen before!” said Jacky. “Who hasn’t seen Hen? He’s serving you
like me, my boys! You wait--Still we love ’em.”

“Are you now satisfied?” Henry asked.

Margaret began to grow frightened. “I don’t know what it is all about,”
 she said. “Let’s come in.”

But he thought she was acting. He thought he was trapped. He saw his
whole life crumbling. “Don’t you indeed?” he said bitingly. “I do. Allow
me to congratulate you on the success of your plan.”

“This is Helen’s plan, not mine.”

“I now understand your interest in the Basts. Very well thought out.
I am amused at your caution, Margaret. You are quite right--it was
necessary. I am a man, and have lived a man’s past. I have the honour to
release you from your engagement.”

Still she could not understand. She knew of life’s seamy side as a
theory; she could not grasp it as a fact. More words from Jacky were
necessary--words unequivocal, undenied.

“So that--” burst from her, and she went indoors. She stopped herself
from saying more.

“So what?” asked Colonel Fussell, who was getting ready to start in the
hall.

“We were saying--Henry and I were just having the fiercest argument, my
point being--” Seizing his fur coat from a footman, she offered to help
him on. He protested, and there was a playful little scene.

“No, let me do that,” said Henry, following.

“Thanks so much! You see--he has forgiven me!”

The Colonel said gallantly: “I don’t expect there’s much to forgive.”

He got into the car. The ladies followed him after an interval.
Maids, courier, and heavier luggage had been sent on earlier by the
branch-line. Still chattering, still thanking their host and patronising
their future hostess, the guests were borne away.

Then Margaret continued: “So that woman has been your mistress?”

“You put it with your usual delicacy,” he replied.

“When, please?”

“Why?”

“When, please?”

“Ten years ago.”

She left him without a word. For it was not her tragedy; it was Mrs.
Wilcox’s.




CHAPTER XXVII

Helen began to wonder why she had spent a matter of eight pounds in
making some people ill and others angry. Now that the wave of excitement
was ebbing, and had left her, Mr. Bast, and Mrs. Bast stranded for the
night in a Shropshire hotel, she asked herself what forces had made the
wave flow. At all events, no harm was done. Margaret would play the game
properly now, and though Helen disapproved of her sister’s methods, she
knew that the Basts would benefit by them in the long-run.

“Mr. Wilcox is so illogical,” she explained to Leonard, who had put his
wife to bed, and was sitting with her in the empty coffee-room. “If we
told him it was his duty to take you on, he might refuse to do it. The
fact is, he isn’t properly educated. I don’t want to set you against
him, but you’ll find him a trial.”

“I can never thank you sufficiently, Miss Schlegel,” was all that
Leonard felt equal to.

“I believe in personal responsibility. Don’t you? And in personal
everything. I hate--I suppose I oughtn’t to say that--but the Wilcoxes
are on the wrong tack surely. Or perhaps it isn’t their fault. Perhaps
the little thing that says ‘I’ is missing out of the middle of their
heads, and then it’s a waste of time to blame them. There’s a nightmare
of a theory that says a special race is being born which will rule the
rest of us in the future just because it lacks the little thing that
says ‘I.’ Had you heard that?”

“I get no time for reading.”

“Had you thought it, then? That there are two kinds of people--our kind,
who live straight from the middle of their heads, and the other kind
who can’t, because their heads have no middle? They can’t say ‘I.’ They
AREN’T in fact, and so they’re supermen. Pierpont Morgan has never said
‘I’ in his life.”

Leonard roused himself. If his benefactress wanted intellectual
conversation, she must have it. She was more important than his ruined
past. “I never got on to Nietzsche,” he said. “But I always understood
that those supermen were rather what you may call egoists.”

“Oh no, that’s wrong,” replied Helen. “No superman ever said ‘I want,’
because ‘I want’ must lead to the question, ‘Who am I?’ and so to Pity
and to Justice. He only says ‘want.’ ‘Want Europe,’ if he’s Napoleon;
‘want wives,’ if he’s Bluebeard; ‘want Botticelli,’ if he’s Pierpont
Morgan. Never the ‘I’; and if you could pierce through the superman,
you’d find panic and emptiness in the middle.”

Leonard was silent for a moment. Then he said: “May I take it, Miss
Schlegel, that you and I are both the sort that say ‘I’?”

“Of course.”

“And your sister, too?”

“Of course,” repeated Helen, a little sharply. She was annoyed with
Margaret, but did not want her discussed. “All presentable people say
‘I.’”

“But Mr. Wilcox--he is not perhaps--”

“I don’t know that it’s any good discussing Mr. Wilcox either.”

“Quite so, quite so,” he agreed. Helen asked herself why she had snubbed
him. Once or twice during the day she had encouraged him to criticise,
and then had pulled him up short. Was she afraid of him presuming? If
so, it was disgusting of her.

But he was thinking the snub quite natural. Everything she did was
natural, and incapable of causing offence. While the Miss Schlegels
were together he had felt them scarcely human--a sort of admonitory
whirligig. But a Miss Schlegel alone was different. She was in Helen’s
case unmarried, in Margaret’s about to be married, in neither case an
echo of her sister. A light had fallen at last into this rich upper
world, and he saw that it was full of men and women, some of whom were
more friendly to him than others. Helen had become “his” Miss Schlegel,
who scolded him and corresponded with him, and had swept down yesterday
with grateful vehemence. Margaret, though not unkind, was severe and
remote. He would not presume to help her, for instance. He had never
liked her, and began to think that his original impression was true,
and that her sister did not like her either. Helen was certainly lonely.
She, who gave away so much, was receiving too little. Leonard was
pleased to think that he could spare her vexation by holding his tongue
and concealing what he knew about Mr. Wilcox. Jacky had announced her
discovery when he fetched her from the lawn. After the first shock, he
did not mind for himself. By now he had no illusions about his wife, and
this was only one new stain on the face of a love that had never been
pure. To keep perfection perfect, that should be his ideal, if the
future gave him time to have ideals. Helen, and Margaret for Helen’s
sake, must not know.

Helen disconcerted him by turning the conversation to his wife. “Mrs.
Bast--does she ever say ‘I’?” she asked, half mischievously, and then,
“Is she very tired?”

“It’s better she stops in her room,” said Leonard.

“Shall I sit up with her?”

“No, thank you; she does not need company.”

“Mr. Bast, what kind of woman is your wife?”

Leonard blushed up to his eyes.

“You ought to know my ways by now. Does that question offend you?”

“No, oh no, Miss Schlegel, no.”

“Because I love honesty. Don’t pretend your marriage has been a happy
one. You and she can have nothing in common.”

He did not deny it, but said shyly: “I suppose that’s pretty obvious;
but Jacky never meant to do anybody any harm. When things went wrong,
or I heard things, I used to think it was her fault, but, looking back,
it’s more mine. I needn’t have married her, but as I have I must stick
to her and keep her.”

“How long have you been married?”

“Nearly three years.”

“What did your people say?”

“They will not have anything to do with us. They had a sort of family
council when they heard I was married, and cut us off altogether.”

Helen began to pace up and down the room. “My good boy, what a mess!”
 she said gently. “Who are your people?”

He could answer this. His parents, who were dead, had been in trade; his
sisters had married commercial travellers; his brother was a lay-reader.

“And your grandparents?”

Leonard told her a secret that he had held shameful up to now. “They
were just nothing at all,” he said “agricultural labourers and that
sort.”

“So! From which part?”

“Lincolnshire mostly, but my mother’s father--he, oddly enough, came
from these parts round here.”

“From this very Shropshire. Yes, that is odd. My mother’s people were
Lancashire. But why do your brother and your sisters object to Mrs.
Bast?”

“Oh, I don’t know.”

“Excuse me, you do know. I am not a baby. I can bear anything you tell
me, and the more you tell the more I shall be able to help. Have they
heard anything against her?”

He was silent.

“I think I have guessed now,” said Helen very gravely.

“I don’t think so, Miss Schlegel; I hope not.”

“We must be honest, even over these things. I have guessed. I am
frightfully, dreadfully sorry, but it does not make the least difference
to me. I shall feel just the same to both of you. I blame, not your wife
for these things, but men.”

Leonard left it at that--so long as she did not guess the man. She stood
at the window and slowly pulled up the blinds. The hotel looked over a
dark square. The mists had begun. When she turned back to him her eyes
were shining. “Don’t you worry,” he pleaded. “I can’t bear that. We
shall be all right if I get work. If I could only get work--something
regular to do. Then it wouldn’t be so bad again. I don’t trouble after
books as I used. I can imagine that with regular work we should settle
down again. It stops one thinking.”

“Settle down to what?”

“Oh, just settle down.”

“And that’s to be life!” said Helen, with a catch in her throat. “How
can you, with all the beautiful things to see and do--with music--with
walking at night--”

“Walking is well enough when a man’s in work,” he answered. “Oh, I did
talk a lot of nonsense once, but there’s nothing like a bailiff in the
house to drive it out of you. When I saw him fingering my Ruskins and
Stevensons, I seemed to see life straight and real, and it isn’t a
pretty sight. My books are back again, thanks to you, but they’ll never
be the same to me again, and I shan’t ever again think night in the
woods is wonderful.”

“Why not?” asked Helen, throwing up the window.

“Because I see one must have money.”

“Well, you’re wrong.”

“I wish I was wrong, but--the clergyman--he has money of his own, or
else he’s paid; the poet or the musician--just the same; the tramp--he’s
no different. The tramp goes to the workhouse in the end, and is paid
for with other people’s money. Miss Schlegel, the real thing’s money, and
all the rest is a dream.”

“You’re still wrong. You’ve forgotten Death.”

Leonard could not understand.

“If we lived forever, what you say would be true. But we have to die,
we have to leave life presently. Injustice and greed would be the real
thing if we lived for ever. As it is, we must hold to other things,
because Death is coming. I love Death--not morbidly, but because He
explains. He shows me the emptiness of Money. Death and Money are the
eternal foes. Not Death and Life. Never mind what lies behind Death, Mr.
Bast, but be sure that the poet and the musician and the tramp will be
happier in it than the man who has never learnt to say, ‘I am I.’”

“I wonder.”

“We are all in a mist--I know, but I can help you this far--men like
the Wilcoxes are deeper in the mist than any. Sane, sound Englishmen!
building up empires, levelling all the world into what they call common
sense. But mention Death to them and they’re offended, because Death’s
really Imperial, and He cries out against them for ever.”

“I am as afraid of Death as any one.”

“But not of the idea of Death.”

“But what is the difference?”

“Infinite difference,” said Helen, more gravely than before.

Leonard looked at her wondering, and had the sense of great things
sweeping out of the shrouded night. But he could not receive them,
because his heart was still full of little things. As the lost umbrella
had spoilt the concert at Queen’s Hall, so the lost situation was
obscuring the diviner harmonies now. Death, Life, and Materialism were
fine words, but would Mr. Wilcox take him on as a clerk? Talk as one
would, Mr. Wilcox was king of this world, the superman, with his own
morality, whose head remained in the clouds.

“I must be stupid,” he said apologetically.

While to Helen the paradox became clearer and clearer. “Death destroys a
man: the idea of Death saves him.” Behind the coffins and the skeletons
that stay the vulgar mind lies something so immense that all that
is great in us responds to it. Men of the world may recoil from the
charnel-house that they will one day enter, but Love knows better. Death
is his foe, but his peer, and in their age-long struggle the thews of
Love have been strengthened, and his vision cleared, until there is no
one who can stand against him.

“So never give in,” continued the girl, and restated again and again the
vague yet convincing plea that the Invisible lodges against the Visible.
Her excitement grew as she tried to cut the rope that fastened Leonard
to the earth. Woven of bitter experience, it resisted her. Presently
the waitress entered and gave her a letter from Margaret. Another note,
addressed to Leonard, was inside. They read them, listening to the
murmurings of the river.



CHAPTER XXVIII

For many hours Margaret did nothing; then she controlled herself, and
wrote some letters. She was too bruised to speak to Henry; she could
pity him, and even determine to marry him, but as yet all lay too deep
in her heart for speech. On the surface the sense of his degradation was
too strong. She could not command voice or look, and the gentle words
that she forced out through her pen seemed to proceed from some other
person.

“My dearest boy,” she began, “this is not to part us. It is everything
or nothing, and I mean it to be nothing. It happened long before we ever
met, and even if it had happened since, I should be writing the same, I
hope. I do understand.”

But she crossed out “I do understand”; it struck a false note. Henry
could not bear to be understood. She also crossed out, “It is everything
or nothing.” Henry would resent so strong a grasp of the situation. She
must not comment; comment is unfeminine.

“I think that’ll about do,” she thought.

Then the sense of his degradation choked her. Was he worth all this
bother? To have yielded to a woman of that sort was everything, yes,
it was, and she could not be his wife. She tried to translate his
temptation into her own language, and her brain reeled. Men must be
different even to want to yield to such a temptation. Her belief in
comradeship was stifled, and she saw life as from that glass saloon on
the Great Western which sheltered male and female alike from the fresh
air. Are the sexes really races, each with its own code of morality, and
their mutual love a mere device of Nature to keep things going? Strip
human intercourse of the proprieties, and is it reduced to this? Her
judgment told her no. She knew that out of Nature’s device we have built
a magic that will win us immortality. Far more mysterious than the call
of sex to sex is the tenderness that we throw into that call; far wider
is the gulf between us and the farmyard than between the farmyard and
the garbage that nourishes it. We are evolving, in ways that Science
cannot measure, to ends that Theology dares not contemplate. “Men
did produce one jewel,” the gods will say, and, saying, will give us
immortality. Margaret knew all this, but for the moment she could not
feel it, and transformed the marriage of Evie and Mr. Cahill into a
carnival of fools, and her own marriage--too miserable to think of that,
she tore up the letter, and then wrote another:


“DEAR MR. BAST,

“I have spoken to Mr. Wilcox about you, as I promised, and am sorry to
say that he has no vacancy for you.

“Yours truly,

“M. J. SCHLEGEL.”


She enclosed this in a note to Helen, over which she took less trouble
than she might have done; but her head was aching, and she could not
stop to pick her words:


“DEAR HELEN,

“Give him this. The Basts are no good. Henry found the woman drunk on
the lawn. I am having a room got ready for you here, and will you please
come round at once on getting this? The Basts are not at all the type we
should trouble about. I may go round to them myself in the morning, and
do anything that is fair.

“M.”


In writing this, Margaret felt that she was being practical. Something
might be arranged for the Basts later on, but they must be silenced
for the moment. She hoped to avoid a conversation between the woman
and Helen. She rang the bell for a servant, but no one answered it;
Mr. Wilcox and the Warringtons were gone to bed, and the kitchen was
abandoned to Saturnalia. Consequently she went over to the George
herself. She did not enter the hotel, for discussion would have been
perilous, and, saying that the letter was important, she gave it to the
waitress. As she recrossed the square she saw Helen and Mr. Bast looking
out of the window of the coffee-room, and feared she was already too
late. Her task was not yet over; she ought to tell Henry what she had
done.

This came easily, for she saw him in the hall. The night wind had been
rattling the pictures against the wall, and the noise had disturbed him.

“Who’s there?” he called, quite the householder.

Margaret walked in and past him.

“I have asked Helen to sleep,” she said. “She is best here; so don’t
lock the front-door.”

“I thought some one had got in,” said Henry.

“At the same time I told the man that we could do nothing for him. I
don’t know about later, but now the Basts must clearly go.”

“Did you say that your sister is sleeping here, after all?”

“Probably.”

“Is she to be shown up to your room?”

“I have naturally nothing to say to her; I am going to bed. Will you
tell the servants about Helen? Could some one go to carry her bag?”

He tapped a little gong, which had been bought to summon the servants.

“You must make more noise than that if you want them to hear.”

Henry opened a door, and down the corridor came shouts of laughter. “Far
too much screaming there,” he said, and strode towards it. Margaret went
upstairs, uncertain whether to be glad that they had met, or sorry. They
had behaved as if nothing had happened, and her deepest instincts told
her that this was wrong. For his own sake, some explanation was due.

And yet--what could an explanation tell her? A date, a place, a few
details, which she could imagine all too clearly. Now that the first
shock was over, she saw that there was every reason to premise a Mrs.
Bast. Henry’s inner life had long laid open to her--his intellectual
confusion, his obtuseness to personal influence, his strong but furtive
passions. Should she refuse him because his outer life corresponded?
Perhaps. Perhaps, if the dishonour had been done to her, but it was done
long before her day. She struggled against the feeling. She told herself
that Mrs. Wilcox’s wrong was her own. But she was not a barren theorist.
As she undressed, her anger, her regard for the dead, her desire for a
scene, all grew weak. Henry must have it as he liked, for she loved him,
and some day she would use her love to make him a better man.

Pity was at the bottom of her actions all through this crisis. Pity, if
one may generalise, is at the bottom of woman. When men like us, it is
for our better qualities, and however tender their liking, we dare not
be unworthy of it, or they will quietly let us go. But unworthiness
stimulates woman. It brings out her deeper nature, for good or for evil.

Here was the core of the question. Henry must be forgiven, and made
better by love; nothing else mattered. Mrs. Wilcox, that unquiet yet
kindly ghost, must be left to her own wrong. To her everything was in
proportion now, and she, too, would pity the man who was blundering
up and down their lives. Had Mrs. Wilcox known of his trespass? An
interesting question, but Margaret fell asleep, tethered by affection,
and lulled by the murmurs of the river that descended all the night from
Wales. She felt herself at one with her future home, colouring it and
coloured by it, and awoke to see, for the second time, Oniton Castle
conquering the morning mists.



CHAPTER XXIX

“Henry dear--” was her greeting.

He had finished his breakfast, and was beginning the Times. His
sister-in-law was packing. Margaret knelt by him and took the paper from
him, feeling that it was unusually heavy and thick. Then, putting her
face where it had been, she looked up in his eyes.

“Henry dear, look at me. No, I won’t have you shirking. Look at me.
There. That’s all.”

“You’re referring to last evening,” he said huskily. “I have released
you from your engagement. I could find excuses, but I won’t. No, I
won’t. A thousand times no. I’m a bad lot, and must be left at that.”

Expelled from his old fortress, Mr. Wilcox was building a new one.
He could no longer appear respectable to her, so he defended himself
instead in a lurid past. It was not true repentance.

“Leave it where you will, boy. It’s not going to trouble us; I know what
I’m talking about, and it will make no difference.”

“No difference?” he inquired. “No difference, when you find that I am
not the fellow you thought?” He was annoyed with Miss Schlegel here. He
would have preferred her to be prostrated by the blow, or even to
rage. Against the tide of his sin flowed the feeling that she was not
altogether womanly. Her eyes gazed too straight; they had read books
that are suitable for men only. And though he had dreaded a scene, and
though she had determined against one, there was a scene, all the same.
It was somehow imperative.

“I am unworthy of you,” he began. “Had I been worthy, I should not have
released you from your engagement. I know what I am talking about. I
can’t bear to talk of such things. We had better leave it.”

She kissed his hand. He jerked it from her, and, rising to his feet,
went on: “You, with your sheltered life, and refined pursuits, and
friends, and books, you and your sister, and women like you--I say, how
can you guess the temptations that lie round a man?”

“It is difficult for us,” said Margaret; “but if we are worth marrying,
we do guess.”

“Cut off from decent society and family ties, what do you suppose
happens to thousands of young fellows overseas? Isolated. No one near. I
know by bitter experience, and yet you say it makes ‘no difference.’”

“Not to me.”

He laughed bitterly. Margaret went to the sideboard and helped herself
to one of the breakfast dishes. Being the last down, she turned out the
spirit-lamp that kept them warm. She was tender, but grave. She knew
that Henry was not so much confessing his soul as pointing out the gulf
between the male soul and the female, and she did not desire to hear him
on this point.

“Did Helen come?” she asked.

He shook his head.

“But that won’t do at all, at all! We don’t want her gossiping with Mrs.
Bast.”

“Good God! no!” he exclaimed, suddenly natural. Then he caught himself
up. “Let them gossip, my game’s up, though I thank you for your
unselfishness--little as my thanks are worth.”

“Didn’t she send me a message or anything?”

“I heard of none.”

“Would you ring the bell, please?”

“What to do?”

“Why, to inquire.”

He swaggered up to it tragically, and sounded a peal. Margaret poured
herself out some coffee. The butler came, and said that Miss Schlegel
had slept at the George, so far as he had heard. Should he go round to
the George?

“I’ll go, thank you,” said Margaret, and dismissed him.

“It is no good,” said Henry. “Those things leak out; you cannot stop a
story once it has started. I have known cases of other men--I despised
them once, I thought that I’m different, I shall never be tempted. Oh,
Margaret--” He came and sat down near her, improvising emotion. She
could not bear to listen to him. “We fellows all come to grief once in
our time. Will you believe that? There are moments when the strongest
man--‘Let him who standeth, take heed lest he fall.’ That’s true,
isn’t it? If you knew all, you would excuse me. I was far from good
influences--far even from England. I was very, very lonely, and longed
for a woman’s voice. That’s enough. I have told you too much already for
you to forgive me now.”

“Yes, that’s enough, dear.”

“I have”--he lowered his voice--“I have been through hell.”

Gravely she considered this claim. Had he? Had he suffered tortures of
remorse, or had it been, “There! that’s over. Now for respectable life
again”? The latter, if she read him rightly. A man who has been through
hell does not boast of his virility. He is humble and hides it, if,
indeed, it still exists. Only in legend does the sinner come forth
penitent, but terrible, to conquer pure woman by his resistless power.
Henry was anxious to be terrible, but had not got it in him. He was a
good average Englishman, who had slipped. The really culpable point--his
faithlessness to Mrs. Wilcox--never seemed to strike him. She longed to
mention Mrs. Wilcox.

And bit by bit the story was told her. It was a very simple story. Ten
years ago was the time, a garrison town in Cyprus the place. Now and
then he asked her whether she could possibly forgive him, and she
answered, “I have already forgiven you, Henry.” She chose her words
carefully, and so saved him from panic. She played the girl, until he
could rebuild his fortress and hide his soul from the world. When the
butler came to clear away, Henry was in a very different mood--asked
the fellow what he was in such a hurry for, complained of the noise last
night in the servants’ hall. Margaret looked intently at the butler. He,
as a handsome young man, was faintly attractive to her as a woman--an
attraction so faint as scarcely to be perceptible, yet the skies would
have fallen if she had mentioned it to Henry.

On her return from the George the building operations were complete, and
the old Henry fronted her, competent, cynical, and kind. He had made a
clean breast, had been forgiven, and the great thing now was to forget
his failure, and to send it the way of other unsuccessful investments.
Jacky rejoined Howards End and Dude Street, and the vermilion motor-car,
and the Argentine Hard Dollars, and all the things and people for whom
he had never had much use and had less now. Their memory hampered him.
He could scarcely attend to Margaret, who brought back disquieting news
from the George. Helen and her clients had gone.

“Well, let them go--the man and his wife, I mean, for the more we see of
your sister the better.”

“But they have gone separately--Helen very early, the Basts just before
I arrived. They have left no message. They have answered neither of my
notes. I don’t like to think what it all means.”

“What did you say in the notes?”

“I told you last night.”

“Oh--ah--yes! Dear, would you like one turn in the garden?”

Margaret took his arm. The beautiful weather soothed her. But the wheels
of Evie’s wedding were still at work, tossing the guests outwards as
deftly as they had drawn them in, and she could not be with him long. It
had been arranged that they should motor to Shrewsbury, whence he would
go north, and she back to London with the Warringtons. For a fraction of
time she was happy. Then her brain recommenced.

“I am afraid there has been gossiping of some kind at the George. Helen
would not have left unless she had heard something. I mismanaged that.
It is wretched. I ought to have parted her from that woman at once.”

“Margaret!” he exclaimed, loosing her arm impressively.

“Yes--yes, Henry?”

“I am far from a saint--in fact, the reverse--but you have taken me, for
better or worse. Bygones must be bygones. You have promised to forgive
me. Margaret, a promise is a promise. Never mention that woman again.”

“Except for some practical reason--never.”

“Practical! You practical!”

“Yes, I’m practical,” she murmured, stooping over the mowing-machine and
playing with the grass which trickled through her fingers like sand.

He had silenced her, but her fears made him uneasy. Not for the first
time, he was threatened with blackmail. He was rich and supposed to be
moral; the Basts knew that he was not, and might find it profitable to
hint as much.

“At all events, you mustn’t worry,” he said. “This is a man’s business.”
 He thought intently. “On no account mention it to anybody.”

Margaret flushed at advice so elementary, but he was really paving the
way for a lie. If necessary he would deny that he had ever known Mrs.
Bast, and prosecute her for libel. Perhaps he never had known her. Here
was Margaret, who behaved as if he had not. There the house. Round them
were half a dozen gardeners, clearing up after his daughter’s wedding.
All was so solid and spruce, that the past flew up out of sight like a
spring-blind, leaving only the last five minutes unrolled.

Glancing at these, he saw that the car would be round during the
next five, and plunged into action. Gongs were tapped, orders issued,
Margaret was sent to dress, and the housemaid to sweep up the long
trickle of grass that she had left across the hall. As is Man to the
Universe, so was the mind of Mr. Wilcox to the minds of some men--a
concentrated light upon a tiny spot, a little Ten Minutes moving
self-contained through its appointed years. No Pagan he, who lives for
the Now, and may be wiser than all philosophers. He lived for the five
minutes that have past, and the five to come; he had the business mind.

How did he stand now, as his motor slipped out of Oniton and breasted
the great round hills? Margaret had heard a certain rumour, but was all
right. She had forgiven him, God bless her, and he felt the manlier for
it. Charles and Evie had not heard it, and never must hear. No more must
Paul. Over his children he felt great tenderness, which he did not try
to track to a cause; Mrs. Wilcox was too far back in his life. He did
not connect her with the sudden aching love that he felt for Evie. Poor
little Evie! he trusted that Cahill would make her a decent husband.

And Margaret? How did she stand?

She had several minor worries. Clearly her sister had heard something.
She dreaded meeting her in town. And she was anxious about Leonard, for
whom they certainly were responsible. Nor ought Mrs. Bast to starve. But
the main situation had not altered. She still loved Henry. His actions,
not his disposition, had disappointed her, and she could bear that. And
she loved her future home. Standing up in the car, just where she had
leapt from it two days before, she gazed back with deep emotion upon
Oniton. Besides the Grange and the Castle keep, she could now pick out
the church and the black-and-white gables of the George. There was the
bridge, and the river nibbling its green peninsula. She could even
see the bathing-shed, but while she was looking for Charles’s new
spring-board, the forehead of the hill rose and hid the whole scene.

She never saw it again. Day and night the river flows down into England,
day after day the sun retreats into the Welsh mountains, and the tower
chimes, See the Conquering Hero. But the Wilcoxes have no part in the
place, nor in any place. It is not their names that recur in the parish
register. It is not their ghosts that sigh among the alders at evening.
They have swept into the valley and swept out of it, leaving a little
dust and a little money behind.



CHAPTER XXX

Tibby was now approaching his last year at Oxford. He had moved out of
college, and was contemplating the Universe, or such portions of it as
concerned him, from his comfortable lodgings in Long Wall. He was not
concerned with much. When a young man is untroubled by passions and
sincerely indifferent to public opinion his outlook is necessarily
limited. Tibby wished neither to strengthen the position of the rich nor
to improve that of the poor, and so was well content to watch the elms
nodding behind the mildly embattled parapets of Magdalen. There are
worse lives. Though selfish, he was never cruel; though affected
in manner, he never posed. Like Margaret, he disdained the heroic
equipment, and it was only after many visits that men discovered
Schlegel to possess a character and a brain. He had done well in Mods,
much to the surprise of those who attended lectures and took proper
exercise, and was now glancing disdainfully at Chinese in case he
should some day consent to qualify as a Student Interpreter. To him thus
employed Helen entered. A telegram had preceded her.

He noticed, in a distant way, that his sister had altered.

As a rule he found her too pronounced, and had never come across this
look of appeal, pathetic yet dignified--the look of a sailor who has
lost everything at sea.

“I have come from Oniton,” she began. “There has been a great deal of
trouble there.”

“Who’s for lunch?” said Tibby, picking up the claret, which was warming
in the hearth. Helen sat down submissively at the table. “Why such an
early start?” he asked.

“Sunrise or something--when I could get away.”

“So I surmise. Why?”

“I don’t know what’s to be done, Tibby. I am very much upset at a piece
of news that concerns Meg, and do not want to face her, and I am not
going back to Wickham Place. I stopped here to tell you this.”

The landlady came in with the cutlets. Tibby put a marker in the leaves
of his Chinese Grammar and helped them. Oxford--the Oxford of the
vacation--dreamed and rustled outside, and indoors the little fire was
coated with grey where the sunshine touched it. Helen continued her odd
story.

“Give Meg my love and say that I want to be alone. I mean to go to
Munich or else Bonn.”

“Such a message is easily given,” said her brother.

“As regards Wickham Place and my share of the furniture, you and she are
to do exactly as you like. My own feeling is that everything may just as
well be sold. What does one want with dusty economic books, which have
made the world no better, or with mother’s hideous chiffoniers? I have
also another commission for you. I want you to deliver a letter.” She
got up. “I haven’t written it yet. Why shouldn’t I post it, though?” She
sat down again. “My head is rather wretched. I hope that none of your
friends are likely to come in.”

Tibby locked the door. His friends often found it in this condition.
Then he asked whether anything had gone wrong at Evie’s wedding.

“Not there,” said Helen, and burst into tears.

He had known her hysterical--it was one of her aspects with which he had
no concern--and yet these tears touched him as something unusual. They
were nearer the things that did concern him, such as music. He laid down
his knife and looked at her curiously. Then, as she continued to sob, he
went on with his lunch.

The time came for the second course, and she was still crying. Apple
Charlotte was to follow, which spoils by waiting. “Do you mind Mrs.
Martlett coming in?” he asked, “or shall I take it from her at the
door?”

“Could I bathe my eyes, Tibby?”

He took her to his bedroom, and introduced the pudding in her absence.
Having helped himself, he put it down to warm in the hearth. His hand
stretched towards the Grammar, and soon he was turning over the pages,
raising his eyebrows scornfully, perhaps at human nature, perhaps at
Chinese. To him thus employed Helen returned. She had pulled herself
together, but the grave appeal had not vanished from her eyes.

“Now for the explanation,” she said. “Why didn’t I begin with it? I
have found out something about Mr. Wilcox. He has behaved very wrongly
indeed, and ruined two people’s lives. It all came on me very suddenly
last night; I am very much upset, and I do not know what to do. Mrs.
Bast--”

“Oh, those people!”

Helen seemed silenced.

“Shall I lock the door again?”

“No thanks, Tibbikins. You’re being very good to me. I want to tell you
the story before I go abroad, you must do exactly what you like--treat
it as part of the furniture. Meg cannot have heard it yet, I think. But
I cannot face her and tell her that the man she is going to marry has
misconducted himself. I don’t even know whether she ought to be told.
Knowing as she does that I dislike him, she will suspect me, and think
that I want to ruin her match. I simply don’t know what to make of such
a thing. I trust your judgment. What would you do?”

“I gather he has had a mistress,” said Tibby.

Helen flushed with shame and anger. “And ruined two people’s lives. And
goes about saying that personal actions count for nothing, and there
always will be rich and poor. He met her when he was trying to get rich
out in Cyprus--I don’t wish to make him worse than he is, and no doubt
she was ready enough to meet him. But there it is. They met. He goes his
way and she goes hers. What do you suppose is the end of such women?”

He conceded that it was a bad business.

“They end in two ways: Either they sink till the lunatic asylums and the
workhouses are full of them, and cause Mr. Wilcox to write letters to
the papers complaining of our national degeneracy, or else they entrap a
boy into marriage before it is too late. She--I can’t blame her.”

“But this isn’t all,” she continued after a long pause, during which the
landlady served them with coffee. “I come now to the business that took
us to Oniton. We went all three. Acting on Mr. Wilcox’s advice, the man
throws up a secure situation and takes an insecure one, from which he is
dismissed. There are certain excuses, but in the main Mr. Wilcox is to
blame, as Meg herself admitted. It is only common justice that he should
employ the man himself. But he meets the woman, and, like the cur that
he is, he refuses, and tries to get rid of them. He makes Meg write.
Two notes came from her late that evening--one for me, one for Leonard,
dismissing him with barely a reason. I couldn’t understand. Then it
comes out that Mrs. Bast had spoken to Mr. Wilcox on the lawn while we
left her to get rooms, and was still speaking about him when Leonard
came back to her. This Leonard knew all along. He thought it natural he
should be ruined twice. Natural! Could you have contained yourself?”

“It is certainly a very bad business,” said Tibby.

His reply seemed to calm his sister. “I was afraid that I saw it out of
proportion. But you are right outside it, and you must know. In a day or
two--or perhaps a week--take whatever steps you think fit. I leave it in
your hands.”

She concluded her charge.

“The facts as they touch Meg are all before you,” she added; and Tibby
sighed and felt it rather hard that, because of his open mind, he should
be empanelled to serve as a juror. He had never been interested in human
beings, for which one must blame him, but he had had rather too much of
them at Wickham Place. Just as some people cease to attend when books
are mentioned, so Tibby’s attention wandered when “personal relations”
 came under discussion. Ought Margaret to know what Helen knew the Basts
to know? Similar questions had vexed him from infancy, and at Oxford he
had learned to say that the importance of human beings has been vastly
overrated by specialists. The epigram, with its faint whiff of the
eighties, meant nothing. But he might have let it off now if his sister
had not been ceaselessly beautiful.

“You see, Helen--have a cigarette--I don’t see what I’m to do.”

“Then there’s nothing to be done. I dare say you are right. Let them
marry. There remains the question of compensation.”

“Do you want me to adjudicate that too? Had you not better consult an
expert?”

“This part is in confidence,” said Helen. “It has nothing to do with
Meg, and do not mention it to her. The compensation--I do not see who is
to pay it if I don’t, and I have already decided on the minimum sum.
As soon as possible I am placing it to your account, and when I am in
Germany you will pay it over for me. I shall never forget your kindness,
Tibbikins, if you do this.”

“What is the sum?”

“Five thousand.”

“Good God alive!” said Tibby, and went crimson.

“Now, what is the good of driblets? To go through life having done one
thing--to have raised one person from the abyss; not these puny gifts of
shillings and blankets--making the grey more grey. No doubt people will
think me extraordinary.”

“I don’t care an iota what people think!” cried he, heated to unusual
manliness of diction. “But it’s half what you have.”

“Not nearly half.” She spread out her hands over her soiled skirt. “I
have far too much, and we settled at Chelsea last spring that three
hundred a year is necessary to set a man on his feet. What I give will
bring in a hundred and fifty between two. It isn’t enough.” He could not
recover. He was not angry or even shocked, and he saw that Helen would
still have plenty to live on. But it amazed him to think what haycocks
people can make of their lives. His delicate intonations would not work,
and he could only blurt out that the five thousand pounds would mean a
great deal of bother for him personally.

“I didn’t expect you to understand me.”

“I? I understand nobody.”

“But you’ll do it?”

“Apparently.”

“I leave you two commissions, then. The first concerns Mr. Wilcox, and
you are to use your discretion. The second concerns the money, and is
to be mentioned to no one, and carried out literally. You will send a
hundred pounds on account to-morrow.”

He walked with her to the station, passing through those streets whose
serried beauty never bewildered him and never fatigued. The lovely
creature raised domes and spires into the cloudless blue, and only
the ganglion of vulgarity round Carfax showed how evanescent was the
phantom, how faint its claim to represent England. Helen, rehearsing her
commission, noticed nothing; the Basts were in her brain, and she retold
the crisis in a meditative way, which might have made other men curious.
She was seeing whether it would hold. He asked her once why she had
taken the Basts right into the heart of Evie’s wedding. She stopped like
a frightened animal and said, “Does that seem to you so odd?” Her eyes,
the hand laid on the mouth, quite haunted him, until they were absorbed
into the figure of St. Mary the Virgin, before whom he paused for a
moment on the walk home.

It is convenient to follow him in the discharge of his duties. Margaret
summoned him the next day. She was terrified at Helen’s flight, and he
had to say that she had called in at Oxford. Then she said: “Did she
seem worried at any rumour about Henry?” He answered, “Yes.” “I knew it
was that!” she exclaimed. “I’ll write to her.” Tibby was relieved.

He then sent the cheque to the address that Helen gave him, and stated
that he was instructed to forward later on five thousand pounds. An
answer came back very civil and quiet in tone--such an answer as Tibby
himself would have given. The cheque was returned, the legacy refused,
the writer being in no need of money. Tibby forwarded this to Helen,
adding in the fulness of his heart that Leonard Bast seemed somewhat a
monumental person after all. Helen’s reply was frantic. He was to
take no notice. He was to go down at once and say that she commanded
acceptance. He went. A scurf of books and china ornaments awaited him.
The Basts had just been evicted for not paying their rent, and had
wandered no one knew whither. Helen had begun bungling with her money by
this time, and had even sold out her shares in the Nottingham and Derby
Railway. For some weeks she did nothing. Then she reinvested, and, owing
to the good advice of her stockbrokers, became rather richer than she
had been before.



CHAPTER XXXI

Houses have their own ways of dying, falling as variously as the
generations of men, some with a tragic roar, some quietly, but to an
after-life in the city of ghosts, while from others--and thus was the
death of Wickham Place--the spirit slips before the body perishes. It
had decayed in the spring, disintegrating the girls more than they knew,
and causing either to accost unfamiliar regions. By September it was a
corpse, void of emotion, and scarcely hallowed by the memories of thirty
years of happiness. Through its round-topped doorway passed furniture,
and pictures, and books, until the last room was gutted and the last van
had rumbled away. It stood for a week or two longer, open-eyed, as if
astonished at its own emptiness. Then it fell. Navvies came, and spilt
it back into the grey. With their muscles and their beery good temper,
they were not the worst of undertakers for a house which had always been
human, and had not mistaken culture for an end.

The furniture, with a few exceptions, went down into Hertfordshire, Mr.
Wilcox having most kindly offered Howards End as a warehouse. Mr. Bryce
had died abroad--an unsatisfactory affair--and as there seemed little
guarantee that the rent would be paid regularly, he cancelled the
agreement, and resumed possession himself. Until he relet the house, the
Schlegels were welcome to stack their furniture in the garage and lower
rooms. Margaret demurred, but Tibby accepted the offer gladly; it saved
him from coming to any decision about the future. The plate and the
more valuable pictures found a safer home in London, but the bulk of the
things went country-ways, and were entrusted to the guardianship of Miss
Avery.

Shortly before the move, our hero and heroine were married. They
have weathered the storm, and may reasonably expect peace. To have no
illusions and yet to love--what stronger surety can a woman find? She
had seen her husband’s past as well as his heart. She knew her own heart
with a thoroughness that commonplace people believe impossible. The
heart of Mrs. Wilcox was alone hidden, and perhaps it is superstitious
to speculate on the feelings of the dead. They were married
quietly--really quietly, for as the day approached she refused to go
through another Oniton. Her brother gave her away, her aunt, who was
out of health, presided over a few colourless refreshments. The Wilcoxes
were represented by Charles, who witnessed the marriage settlement, and
by Mr. Cahill. Paul did send a cablegram. In a few minutes, and without
the aid of music, the clergyman made them man and wife, and soon the
glass shade had fallen that cuts off married couples from the world.
She, a monogamist, regretted the cessation of some of life’s innocent
odours; he, whose instincts were polygamous, felt morally braced by the
change and less liable to the temptations that had assailed him in the
past.

They spent their honeymoon near Innsbruck. Henry knew of a reliable
hotel there, and Margaret hoped for a meeting with her sister. In this
she was disappointed. As they came south, Helen retreated over the
Brenner, and wrote an unsatisfactory post-card from the shores of the
Lake of Garda, saying that her plans were uncertain and had better be
ignored. Evidently she disliked meeting Henry. Two months are surely
enough to accustom an outsider to a situation which a wife has accepted
in two days, and Margaret had again to regret her sister’s lack of
self-control. In a long letter she pointed out the need of charity in
sexual matters; so little is known about them; it is hard enough for
those who are personally touched to judge; then how futile must be the
verdict of Society. “I don’t say there is no standard, for that would
destroy morality; only that there can be no standard until our impulses
are classified and better understood.” Helen thanked her for her kind
letter--rather a curious reply. She moved south again, and spoke of
wintering in Naples.

Mr. Wilcox was not sorry that the meeting failed. Helen left him time to
grow skin over his wound. There were still moments when it pained him.
Had he only known that Margaret was awaiting him--Margaret, so lively
and intelligent, and yet so submissive--he would have kept himself
worthier of her. Incapable of grouping the past, he confused the episode
of Jacky with another episode that had taken place in the days of his
bachelorhood. The two made one crop of wild oats, for which he was
heartily sorry, and he could not see that those oats are of a darker
stock which are rooted in another’s dishonour. Unchastity and infidelity
were as confused to him as to the Middle Ages, his only moral teacher.
Ruth (poor old Ruth!) did not enter into his calculations at all, for
poor old Ruth had never found him out.

His affection for his present wife grew steadily. Her cleverness gave
him no trouble, and, indeed, he liked to see her reading poetry or
something about social questions; it distinguished her from the wives
of other men. He had only to call, and she clapped the book up and was
ready to do what he wished. Then they would argue so jollily, and once
or twice she had him in quite a tight corner, but as soon as he grew
really serious, she gave in. Man is for war, woman for the recreation
of the warrior, but he does not dislike it if she makes a show of fight.
She cannot win in a real battle, having no muscles, only nerves.
Nerves make her jump out of a moving motor-car, or refuse to be
married fashionably. The warrior may well allow her to triumph on such
occasions; they move not the imperishable plinth of things that touch
his peace.

Margaret had a bad attack of these nerves during the honeymoon. He told
her--casually, as was his habit--that Oniton Grange was let. She showed
her annoyance, and asked rather crossly why she had not been consulted.

“I didn’t want to bother you,” he replied. “Besides, I have only heard
for certain this morning.”

“Where are we to live?” said Margaret, trying to laugh. “I loved the
place extraordinarily. Don’t you believe in having a permanent home,
Henry?”

He assured her that she misunderstood him. It is home life that
distinguishes us from the foreigner. But he did not believe in a damp
home.

“This is news. I never heard till this minute that Oniton was damp.”

“My dear girl!”--he flung out his hand--“have you eyes? have you a skin?
How could it be anything but damp in such a situation? In the first
place, the Grange is on clay, and built where the castle moat must have
been; then there’s that detestable little river, steaming all night like
a kettle. Feel the cellar walls; look up under the eaves. Ask Sir James
or any one. Those Shropshire valleys are notorious. The only possible
place for a house in Shropshire is on a hill; but, for my part, I think
the country is too far from London, and the scenery nothing special.”

Margaret could not resist saying, “Why did you go there, then?”

“I--because--” He drew his head back and grew rather angry. “Why have
we come to the Tyrol, if it comes to that? One might go on asking such
questions indefinitely.”

One might; but he was only gaining time for a plausible answer. Out it
came, and he believed it as soon as it was spoken.

“The truth is, I took Oniton on account of Evie. Don’t let this go any
further.”

“Certainly not.”

“I shouldn’t like her to know that she nearly let me in for a very bad
bargain. No sooner did I sign the agreement than she got engaged. Poor
little girl! She was so keen on it all, and wouldn’t even wait to
make proper inquiries about the shooting. Afraid it would get snapped
up--just like all of your sex. Well, no harm’s done. She has had her
country wedding, and I’ve got rid of my goose to some fellows who are
starting a preparatory school.”

“Where shall we live, then, Henry? I should enjoy living somewhere.”

“I have not yet decided. What about Norfolk?”

Margaret was silent. Marriage had not saved her from the sense of
flux. London was but a foretaste of this nomadic civilisation which is
altering human nature so profoundly, and throws upon personal
relations a stress greater than they have ever borne before. Under
cosmopolitanism, if it comes, we shall receive no help from the earth.
Trees and meadows and mountains will only be a spectacle, and the
binding force that they once exercised on character must be entrusted to
Love alone. May Love be equal to the task!

“It is now what?” continued Henry. “Nearly October. Let us camp for the
winter at Ducie Street, and look out for something in the spring.”

“If possible, something permanent. I can’t be as young as I was, for
these alterations don’t suit me.”

“But, my dear, which would you rather have--alterations or rheumatism?”

“I see your point,” said Margaret, getting up. “If Oniton is really
damp, it is impossible, and must be inhabited by little boys. Only, in
the spring, let us look before we leap. I will take warning by Evie,
and not hurry you. Remember that you have a free hand this time.
These endless moves must be bad for the furniture, and are certainly
expensive.”

“What a practical little woman it is! What’s it been reading?
Theo--theo--how much?”

“Theosophy.”

So Ducie Street was her first fate--a pleasant enough fate. The house,
being only a little larger than Wickham Place, trained her for the
immense establishment that was promised in the spring. They were
frequently away, but at home life ran fairly regularly. In the
morning Henry went to business, and his sandwich--a relic this of some
prehistoric craving--was always cut by her own hand. He did not rely
upon the sandwich for lunch, but liked to have it by him in case he grew
hungry at eleven. When he had gone, there was the house to look after,
and the servants to humanise, and several kettles of Helen’s to keep on
the boil. Her conscience pricked her a little about the Basts; she
was not sorry to have lost sight of them. No doubt Leonard was worth
helping, but being Henry’s wife, she preferred to help some one else. As
for theatres and discussion societies, they attracted her less and
less. She began to “miss” new movements, and to spend her spare time
re-reading or thinking, rather to the concern of her Chelsea friends.
They attributed the change to her marriage, and perhaps some deep
instinct did warn her not to travel further from her husband than
was inevitable. Yet the main cause lay deeper still; she had outgrown
stimulants, and was passing from words to things. It was doubtless a
pity not to keep up with Wedekind or John, but some closing of the gates
is inevitable after thirty, if the mind itself is to become a creative
power.



CHAPTER XXXII

She was looking at plans one day in the following spring--they had
finally decided to go down into Sussex and build--when Mrs. Charles
Wilcox was announced.

“Have you heard the news?” Dolly cried, as soon as she entered the room.
“Charles is so ang--I mean he is sure you know about it, or, rather, that
you don’t know.”

“Why, Dolly!” said Margaret, placidly kissing her. “Here’s a surprise!
How are the boys and the baby?”

Boys and the baby were well, and in describing a great row that there
had been at the Hilton Tennis Club, Dolly forgot her news. The wrong
people had tried to get in. The rector, as representing the older
inhabitants, had said--Charles had said--the tax-collector had
said--Charles had regretted not saying--and she closed the description
with, “But lucky you, with four courts of your own at Midhurst.”

“It will be very jolly,” replied Margaret.

“Are those the plans? Does it matter my seeing them?”

“Of course not.”

“Charles has never seen the plans.”

“They have only just arrived. Here is the ground floor--no, that’s
rather difficult. Try the elevation. We are to have a good many gables
and a picturesque sky-line.”

“What makes it smell so funny?” said Dolly, after a moment’s inspection.
She was incapable of understanding plans or maps.

“I suppose the paper.”

“And WHICH way up is it?”

“Just the ordinary way up. That’s the sky-line and the part that smells
strongest is the sky.”

“Well, ask me another. Margaret--oh--what was I going to say? How’s
Helen?”

“Quite well.”

“Is she never coming back to England? Every one thinks it’s awfully odd
she doesn’t.”

“So it is,” said Margaret, trying to conceal her vexation. She was
getting rather sore on this point. “Helen is odd, awfully. She has now
been away eight months.”

“But hasn’t she any address?”

“A poste restante somewhere in Bavaria is her address. Do write her a
line. I will look it up for you.”

“No, don’t bother. That’s eight months she has been away, surely?”

“Exactly. She left just after Evie’s wedding. It would be eight months.”

“Just when baby was born, then?”

“Just so.”

Dolly sighed, and stared enviously round the drawing-room. She was
beginning to lose her brightness and good looks. The Charles’s were not
well off, for Mr. Wilcox, having brought up his children with expensive
tastes, believed in letting them shift for themselves. After all, he
had not treated them generously. Yet another baby was expected, she
told Margaret, and they would have to give up the motor. Margaret
sympathised, but in a formal fashion, and Dolly little imagined that the
stepmother was urging Mr. Wilcox to make them a more liberal allowance.
She sighed again, and at last the particular grievance was remembered.
“Oh, yes,” she cried, “that is it: Miss Avery has been unpacking your
packing-cases.”

“Why has she done that? How unnecessary!”

“Ask another. I suppose you ordered her to.”

“I gave no such orders. Perhaps she was airing the things. She did
undertake to light an occasional fire.”

“It was far more than an air,” said Dolly solemnly. “The floor sounds
covered with books. Charles sent me to know what is to be done, for he
feels certain you don’t know.”

“Books!” cried Margaret, moved by the holy word. “Dolly, are you
serious? Has she been touching our books?”

“Hasn’t she, though! What used to be the hall’s full of them. Charles
thought for certain you knew of it.”

“I am very much obliged to you, Dolly. What can have come over Miss
Avery? I must go down about it at once. Some of the books are my
brother’s, and are quite valuable. She had no right to open any of the
cases.”

“I say she’s dotty. She was the one that never got married, you know.
Oh, I say, perhaps, she thinks your books are wedding-presents to
herself. Old maids are taken that way sometimes. Miss Avery hates us all
like poison ever since her frightful dust-up with Evie.”

“I hadn’t heard of that,” said Margaret. A visit from Dolly had its
compensations.

“Didn’t you know she gave Evie a present last August, and Evie returned
it, and then--oh, goloshes! You never read such a letter as Miss Avery
wrote.”

“But it was wrong of Evie to return it. It wasn’t like her to do such a
heartless thing.”

“But the present was so expensive.”

“Why does that make any difference, Dolly?”

“Still, when it costs over five pounds--I didn’t see it, but it was
a lovely enamel pendant from a Bond Street shop. You can’t very well
accept that kind of thing from a farm woman. Now, can you?”

“You accepted a present from Miss Avery when you were married.”

“Oh, mine was old earthenware stuff--not worth a halfpenny. Evie’s was
quite different. You’d have to ask any one to the wedding who gave you
a pendant like that. Uncle Percy and Albert and father and Charles all
said it was quite impossible, and when four men agree, what is a girl to
do? Evie didn’t want to upset the old thing, so thought a sort of joking
letter best, and returned the pendant straight to the shop to save Miss
Avery trouble.”

“But Miss Avery said--”

Dolly’s eyes grew round. “It was a perfectly awful letter. Charles said
it was the letter of a madman. In the end she had the pendant back again
from the shop and threw it into the duck-pond.”

“Did she give any reasons?”

“We think she meant to be invited to Oniton, and so climb into society.”

“She’s rather old for that,” said Margaret pensively. “May she not have
given the present to Evie in remembrance of her mother?”

“That’s a notion. Give every one their due, eh? Well, I suppose I ought
to be toddling. Come along, Mr. Muff--you want a new coat, but I don’t
know who’ll give it you, I’m sure;” and addressing her apparel with
mournful humour, Dolly moved from the room.

Margaret followed her to ask whether Henry knew about Miss Avery’s
rudeness.

“Oh yes.”

“I wonder, then, why he let me ask her to look after the house.”

“But she’s only a farm woman,” said Dolly, and her explanation proved
correct. Henry only censured the lower classes when it suited him. He
bore with Miss Avery as with Crane--because he could get good value out
of them. “I have patience with a man who knows his job,” he would say,
really having patience with the job, and not the man. Paradoxical as it
may sound, he had something of the artist about him; he would pass over
an insult to his daughter sooner than lose a good charwoman for his
wife.

Margaret judged it better to settle the little trouble herself. Parties
were evidently ruffled. With Henry’s permission, she wrote a pleasant
note to Miss Avery, asking her to leave the cases untouched. Then, at
the first convenient opportunity, she went down herself, intending to
repack her belongings and store them properly in the local warehouse;
the plan had been amateurish and a failure. Tibby promised to accompany
her, but at the last moment begged to be excused. So, for the second
time in her life, she entered the house alone.



CHAPTER XXXIII

The day of her visit was exquisite, and the last of unclouded happiness
that she was to have for many months. Her anxiety about Helen’s
extraordinary absence was still dormant, and as for a possible brush
with Miss Avery--that only gave zest to the expedition. She had also
eluded Dolly’s invitation to luncheon. Walking straight up from the
station, she crossed the village green and entered the long chestnut
avenue that connects it with the church. The church itself stood in the
village once. But it there attracted so many worshippers that the
devil, in a pet, snatched it from its foundations, and poised it on
an inconvenient knoll, three quarters of a mile away. If this story is
true, the chestnut avenue must have been planted by the angels. No more
tempting approach could be imagined for the lukewarm Christian, and if
he still finds the walk too long, the devil is defeated all the same,
Science having built Holy Trinity, a Chapel of Ease, near the Charles’s
and roofed it with tin.

Up the avenue Margaret strolled slowly, stopping to watch the sky that
gleamed through the upper branches of the chestnuts, or to finger the
little horseshoes on the lower branches. Why has not England a great
mythology? Our folklore has never advanced beyond daintiness, and the
greater melodies about our country-side have all issued through the
pipes of Greece. Deep and true as the native imagination can be, it
seems to have failed here. It has stopped with the witches and the
fairies. It cannot vivify one fraction of a summer field, or give names
to half a dozen stars. England still waits for the supreme moment of her
literature--for the great poet who shall voice her, or, better still for
the thousand little poets whose voices shall pass into our common talk.

At the church the scenery changed. The chestnut avenue opened into
a road, smooth but narrow, which led into the untouched country. She
followed it for over a mile. Its little hesitations pleased her. Having
no urgent destiny, it strolled downhill or up as it wished, taking
no trouble about the gradients, or about the view, which nevertheless
expanded. The great estates that throttle the south of Hertfordshire
were less obtrusive here, and the appearance of the land was neither
aristocratic nor suburban. To define it was difficult, but Margaret knew
what it was not: it was not snobbish. Though its contours were slight,
there was a touch of freedom in their sweep to which Surrey will never
attain, and the distant brow of the Chilterns towered like a mountain.
“Left to itself,” was Margaret’s opinion, “this county would vote
Liberal.” The comradeship, not passionate, that is our highest gift as
a nation, was promised by it, as by the low brick farm where she called
for the key.

But the inside of the farm was disappointing. A most finished young
person received her. “Yes, Mrs. Wilcox; no, Mrs. Wilcox; oh yes, Mrs.
Wilcox, auntie received your letter quite duly. Auntie has gone up to
your little place at the present moment. Shall I send the servant to
direct you?” Followed by: “Of course, auntie does not generally look
after your place; she only does it to oblige a neighbour as something
exceptional. It gives her something to do. She spends quite a lot of her
time there. My husband says to me sometimes, ‘Where’s auntie?’ I say,
‘Need you ask? She’s at Howards End.’ Yes, Mrs. Wilcox. Mrs. Wilcox,
could I prevail upon you to accept a piece of cake? Not if I cut it for
you?”

Margaret refused the cake, but unfortunately this gave her gentility in
the eyes of Miss Avery’s niece.

“I cannot let you go on alone. Now don’t. You really mustn’t. I
will direct you myself if it comes to that. I must get my hat.
Now”--roguishly--“Mrs. Wilcox, don’t you move while I’m gone.”

Stunned, Margaret did not move from the best parlour, over which the
touch of art nouveau had fallen. But the other rooms looked in keeping,
though they conveyed the peculiar sadness of a rural interior. Here had
lived an elder race, to which we look back with disquietude. The country
which we visit at week-ends was really a home to it, and the graver
sides of life, the deaths, the partings, the yearnings for love,
have their deepest expression in the heart of the fields. All was not
sadness. The sun was shining without. The thrush sang his two syllables
on the budding guelder-rose. Some children were playing uproariously
in heaps of golden straw. It was the presence of sadness at all that
surprised Margaret, and ended by giving her a feeling of completeness.
In these English farms, if anywhere, one might see life steadily and see
it whole, group in one vision its transitoriness and its eternal youth,
connect--connect without bitterness until all men are brothers. But her
thoughts were interrupted by the return of Miss Avery’s niece, and were
so tranquillising that she suffered the interruption gladly.

It was quicker to go out by the back door, and, after due explanations,
they went out by it. The niece was now mortified by innumerable
chickens, who rushed up to her feet for food, and by a shameless and
maternal sow. She did not know what animals were coming to. But her
gentility withered at the touch of the sweet air. The wind was rising,
scattering the straw and ruffling the tails of the ducks as they floated
in families over Evie’s pendant. One of those delicious gales of spring,
in which leaves still in bud seem to rustle, swept over the land and
then fell silent. “Georgie,” sang the thrush. “Cuckoo,” came furtively
from the cliff of pine-trees. “Georgie, pretty Georgie,” and the other
birds joined in with nonsense. The hedge was a half-painted picture
which would be finished in a few days. Celandines grew on its banks,
lords and ladies and primroses in the defended hollows; the wild
rose-bushes, still bearing their withered hips, showed also the promise
of blossom. Spring had come, clad in no classical garb, yet fairer
than all springs; fairer even than she who walks through the myrtles of
Tuscany with the graces before her and the zephyr behind.

The two women walked up the lane full of outward civility. But Margaret
was thinking how difficult it was to be earnest about furniture on such
a day, and the niece was thinking about hats. Thus engaged, they reached
Howards End. Petulant cries of “Auntie!” severed the air. There was no
reply, and the front door was locked.

“Are you sure that Miss Avery is up here?” asked Margaret.

“Oh, yes, Mrs. Wilcox, quite sure. She is here daily.”

Margaret tried to look in through the dining-room window, but the
curtain inside was drawn tightly. So with the drawing-room and the hall.
The appearance of these curtains was familiar, yet she did not remember
their being there on her other visit; her impression was that Mr. Bryce
had taken everything away. They tried the back. Here again they received
no answer, and could see nothing; the kitchen-window was fitted with
a blind, while the pantry and scullery had pieces of wood propped up
against them, which looked ominously like the lids of packing-cases.
Margaret thought of her books, and she lifted up her voice also. At the
first cry she succeeded.

“Well, well!” replied some one inside the house. “If it isn’t Mrs.
Wilcox come at last!”

“Have you got the key, auntie?”

“Madge, go away,” said Miss Avery, still invisible.

“Auntie, it’s Mrs. Wilcox--”

Margaret supported her. “Your niece and I have come together.”

“Madge, go away. This is no moment for your hat.”

The poor woman went red. “Auntie gets more eccentric lately,” she said
nervously.

“Miss Avery!” called Margaret. “I have come about the furniture. Could
you kindly let me in?”

“Yes, Mrs. Wilcox,” said the voice, “of course.” But after that came
silence. They called again without response. They walked round the house
disconsolately.

“I hope Miss Avery is not ill,” hazarded Margaret.

“Well, if you’ll excuse me,” said Madge, “perhaps I ought to be leaving
you now. The servants need seeing to at the farm. Auntie is so odd at
times.” Gathering up her elegancies, she retired defeated, and, as if
her departure had loosed a spring, the front door opened at once.

Miss Avery said, “Well, come right in, Mrs. Wilcox!” quite pleasantly
and calmly.

“Thank you so much,” began Margaret, but broke off at the sight of an
umbrella-stand. It was her own.

“Come right into the hall first,” said Miss Avery. She drew the curtain,
and Margaret uttered a cry of despair. For an appalling thing had
happened. The hall was fitted up with the contents of the library from
Wickham Place. The carpet had been laid, the big work-table drawn up
near the window; the bookcases filled the wall opposite the fireplace,
and her father’s sword--this is what bewildered her particularly--had
been drawn from its scabbard and hung naked amongst the sober volumes.
Miss Avery must have worked for days.

“I’m afraid this isn’t what we meant,” she began. “Mr. Wilcox and I
never intended the cases to be touched. For instance, these books are my
brother’s. We are storing them for him and for my sister, who is abroad.
When you kindly undertook to look after things, we never expected you to
do so much.”

“The house has been empty long enough,” said the old woman.

Margaret refused to argue. “I dare say we didn’t explain,” she said
civilly. “It has been a mistake, and very likely our mistake.”

“Mrs. Wilcox, it has been mistake upon mistake for fifty years. The
house is Mrs. Wilcox’s, and she would not desire it to stand empty any
longer.”

To help the poor decaying brain, Margaret said:

“Yes, Mrs. Wilcox’s house, the mother of Mr. Charles.”

“Mistake upon mistake,” said Miss Avery. “Mistake upon mistake.”

“Well, I don’t know,” said Margaret, sitting down in one of her own
chairs. “I really don’t know what’s to be done.” She could not help
laughing.

The other said: “Yes, it should be a merry house enough.”

“I don’t know--I dare say. Well, thank you very much, Miss Avery. Yes,
that’s all right. Delightful.”

“There is still the parlour.” She went through the door opposite and
drew a curtain. Light flooded the drawing-room furniture from Wickham
Place. “And the dining-room.” More curtains were drawn, more windows
were flung open to the spring. “Then through here--” Miss Avery
continued passing and reprising through the hall. Her voice was lost,
but Margaret heard her pulling up the kitchen blind. “I’ve not finished
here yet,” she announced, returning. “There’s still a deal to do. The
farm lads will carry your great wardrobes upstairs, for there is no need
to go into expense at Hilton.”

“It is all a mistake,” repeated Margaret, feeling that she must put her
foot down. “A misunderstanding. Mr. Wilcox and I are not going to live
at Howards End.”

“Oh, indeed! On account of his hay fever?”

“We have settled to build a new home for ourselves in Sussex, and part
of this furniture--my part--will go down there presently.” She looked at
Miss Avery intently, trying to understand the kink in her brain.

Here was no maundering old woman. Her wrinkles were shrewd and humorous.
She looked capable of scathing wit and also of high but unostentatious
nobility. “You think that you won’t come back to live here, Mrs. Wilcox,
but you will.”

“That remains to be seen,” said Margaret, smiling. “We have no intention
of doing so for the present. We happen to need a much larger house.
Circumstances oblige us to give big parties. Of course, some day--one
never knows, does one?”

Miss Avery retorted: “Some day! Tcha! tcha! Don’t talk about some day.
You are living here now.”

“Am I?”

“You are living here, and have been for the last ten minutes, if you ask
me.”

It was a senseless remark, but with a queer feeling of disloyalty
Margaret rose from her chair. She felt that Henry had been obscurely
censured. They went into the dining-room, where the sunlight poured in
upon her mother’s chiffonier, and upstairs, where many an old god peeped
from a new niche. The furniture fitted extraordinarily well. In the
central room--over the hall, the room that Helen had slept in four years
ago--Miss Avery had placed Tibby’s old bassinette.

“The nursery,” she said.

Margaret turned away without speaking.

At last everything was seen. The kitchen and lobby were still stacked
with furniture and straw, but, as far as she could make out, nothing
had been broken or scratched. A pathetic display of ingenuity! Then they
took a friendly stroll in the garden. It had gone wild since her last
visit. The gravel sweep was weedy, and grass had sprung up at the very
jaws of the garage. And Evie’s rockery was only bumps. Perhaps Evie was
responsible for Miss Avery’s oddness. But Margaret suspected that the
cause lay deeper, and that the girl’s silly letter had but loosed the
irritation of years.

“It’s a beautiful meadow,” she remarked. It was one of those open-air
drawing-rooms that have been formed, hundreds of years ago, out of the
smaller fields. So the boundary hedge zigzagged down the hill at right
angles, and at the bottom there was a little green annex--a sort of
powder-closet for the cows.

“Yes, the maidy’s well enough,” said Miss Avery, “for those, that is,
who don’t suffer from sneezing.” And she cackled maliciously. “I’ve
seen Charlie Wilcox go out to my lads in hay time--oh, they ought to do
this--they mustn’t do that--he’d learn them to be lads. And just then
the tickling took him. He has it from his father, with other things.
There’s not one Wilcox that can stand up against a field in June--I
laughed fit to burst while he was courting Ruth.”

“My brother gets hay fever too,” said Margaret.

“This house lies too much on the land for them. Naturally, they were
glad enough to slip in at first. But Wilcoxes are better than nothing,
as I see you’ve found.”

Margaret laughed.

“They keep a place going, don’t they? Yes, it is just that.”

“They keep England going, it is my opinion.”

But Miss Avery upset her by replying: “Ay, they breed like rabbits.
Well, well, it’s a funny world. But He who made it knows what He wants
in it, I suppose. If Mrs. Charlie is expecting her fourth, it isn’t for
us to repine.”

“They breed and they also work,” said Margaret, conscious of some
invitation to disloyalty, which was echoed by the very breeze and by the
songs of the birds. “It certainly is a funny world, but so long as men
like my husband and his sons govern it, I think it’ll never be a bad
one--never really bad.”

“No, better’n nothing,” said Miss Avery, and turned to the wych-elm.

On their way back to the farm she spoke of her old friend much more
clearly than before. In the house Margaret had wondered whether she
quite distinguished the first wife from the second. Now she said: “I
never saw much of Ruth after her grandmother died, but we stayed civil.
It was a very civil family. Old Mrs. Howard never spoke against
anybody, nor let any one be turned away without food. Then it was never
‘Trespassers will be prosecuted’ in their land, but would people please
not come in? Mrs. Howard was never created to run a farm.”

“Had they no men to help them?” Margaret asked.

Miss Avery replied: “Things went on until there were no men.”

“Until Mr. Wilcox came along,” corrected Margaret, anxious that her
husband should receive his dues.

“I suppose so; but Ruth should have married a--no disrespect to you to
say this, for I take it you were intended to get Wilcox any way, whether
she got him first or no.”

“Whom should she have married?”

“A soldier!” exclaimed the old woman. “Some real soldier.”

Margaret was silent. It was a criticism of Henry’s character far more
trenchant than any of her own. She felt dissatisfied.

“But that’s all over,” she went on. “A better time is coming now, though
you’ve kept me long enough waiting. In a couple of weeks I’ll see your
light shining through the hedge of an evening. Have you ordered in
coals?”

“We are not coming,” said Margaret firmly. She respected Miss Avery too
much to humour her. “No. Not coming. Never coming. It has all been a
mistake. The furniture must be repacked at once, and I am very sorry,
but I am making other arrangements, and must ask you to give me the
keys.”

“Certainly, Mrs. Wilcox,” said Miss Avery, and resigned her duties with
a smile.

Relieved at this conclusion, and having sent her compliments to Madge,
Margaret walked back to the station. She had intended to go to the
furniture warehouse and give directions for removal, but the muddle had
turned out more extensive than she expected, so she decided to consult
Henry. It was as well that she did this. He was strongly against
employing the local man whom he had previously recommended, and advised
her to store in London after all.

But before this could be done an unexpected trouble fell upon her.



CHAPTER XXXIV

It was not unexpected entirely. Aunt Juley’s health had been bad all
winter. She had had a long series of colds and coughs, and had been too
busy to get rid of them. She had scarcely promised her niece “to really
take my tiresome chest in hand,” when she caught a chill and developed
acute pneumonia. Margaret and Tibby went down to Swanage. Helen was
telegraphed for, and that spring party that after all gathered in that
hospitable house had all the pathos of fair memories. On a perfect day,
when the sky seemed blue porcelain, and the waves of the discreet little
bay beat gentlest of tattoos upon the sand, Margaret hurried up through
the rhododendrons, confronted again by the senselessness of Death.
One death may explain itself, but it throws no light upon another; the
groping inquiry must begin anew. Preachers or scientists may generalise,
but we know that no generality is possible about those whom we love; not
one heaven awaits them, not even one oblivion. Aunt Juley, incapable of
tragedy, slipped out of life with odd little laughs and apologies for
having stopped in it so long. She was very weak; she could not rise to
the occasion, or realise the great mystery which all agree must await
her; it only seemed to her that she was quite done up--more done up
than ever before; that she saw and heard and felt less every moment; and
that, unless something changed, she would soon feel nothing. Her spare
strength she devoted to plans: could not Margaret take some steamer
expeditions? were mackerel cooked as Tibby liked them? She worried
herself about Helen’s absence, and also that she should be the cause of
Helen’s return. The nurses seemed to think such interests quite natural,
and perhaps hers was an average approach to the Great Gate. But Margaret
saw Death stripped of any false romance; whatever the idea of Death may
contain, the process can be trivial and hideous.

“Important--Margaret dear, take the Lulworth when Helen comes.”

“Helen won’t be able to stop, Aunt Juley. She has telegraphed that she
can only get away just to see you. She must go back to Germany as soon
as you are well.”

“How very odd of Helen! Mr. Wilcox--”

“Yes, dear?”

“Can he spare you?”

Henry wished her to come, and had been very kind. Yet again Margaret
said so.

Mrs. Munt did not die. Quite outside her will, a more dignified power
took hold of her and checked her on the downward slope. She returned,
without emotion, as fidgety as ever. On the fourth day she was out of
danger.

“Margaret--important,” it went on: “I should like you to have some
companion to take walks with. Do try Miss Conder.”

“I have been for a little walk with Miss Conder.”

“But she is not really interesting. If only you had Helen.”

“I have Tibby, Aunt Juley.”

“No, but he has to do his Chinese. Some real companion is what you need.
Really, Helen is odd.”

“Helen is odd, very,” agreed Margaret.

“Not content with going abroad, why does she want to go back there at
once?”

“No doubt she will change her mind when she sees us. She has not the
least balance.”

That was the stock criticism about Helen, but Margaret’s voice trembled
as she made it. By now she was deeply pained at her sister’s behaviour.
It may be unbalanced to fly out of England, but to stay away eight
months argues that the heart is awry as well as the head. A sick-bed
could recall Helen, but she was deaf to more human calls; after a
glimpse at her aunt, she would retire into her nebulous life behind some
poste restante. She scarcely existed; her letters had become dull and
infrequent; she had no wants and no curiosity. And it was all put down
to poor Henry’s account! Henry, long pardoned by his wife, was still too
infamous to be greeted by his sister-in-law. It was morbid, and, to her
alarm, Margaret fancied that she could trace the growth of morbidity
back in Helen’s life for nearly four years. The flight from Oniton;
the unbalanced patronage of the Basts; the explosion of grief up on
the Downs--all connected with Paul, an insignificant boy whose lips had
kissed hers for a fraction of time. Margaret and Mrs. Wilcox had feared
that they might kiss again. Foolishly--the real danger was reaction.
Reaction against the Wilcoxes had eaten into her life until she was
scarcely sane. At twenty-five she had an idee fixe. What hope was there
for her as an old woman?

The more Margaret thought about it the more alarmed she became. For many
months she had put the subject away, but it was too big to be slighted
now. There was almost a taint of madness. Were all Helen’s actions to be
governed by a tiny mishap, such as may happen to any young man or
woman? Can human nature be constructed on lines so insignificant? The
blundering little encounter at Howards End was vital. It propagated
itself where graver intercourse lay barren; it was stronger than
sisterly intimacy, stronger than reason or books. In one of her moods
Helen had confessed that she still “enjoyed” it in a certain sense.
Paul had faded, but the magic of his caress endured. And where there is
enjoyment of the past there may also be reaction--propagation at both
ends.

Well, it is odd and sad that our minds should be such seed-beds, and
we without power to choose the seed. But man is an odd, sad creature as
yet, intent on pilfering the earth, and heedless of the growths within
himself. He cannot be bored about psychology. He leaves it to the
specialist, which is as if he should leave his dinner to be eaten by a
steam-engine. He cannot be bothered to digest his own soul. Margaret
and Helen have been more patient, and it is suggested that Margaret
has succeeded--so far as success is yet possible. She does understand
herself, she has some rudimentary control over her own growth. Whether
Helen has succeeded one cannot say.

The day that Mrs. Munt rallied Helen’s letter arrived. She had posted
it at Munich, and would be in London herself on the morrow. It was a
disquieting letter, though the opening was affectionate and sane.


“DEAREST MEG,

“Give Helen’s love to Aunt Juley. Tell her that I love, and have loved
her ever since I can remember. I shall be in London Thursday.

“My address will be care of the bankers. I have not yet settled on a
hotel, so write or wire to me there and give me detailed news. If Aunt
Juley is much better, or if, for a terrible reason, it would be no good
my coming down to Swanage, you must not think it odd if I do not come.
I have all sorts of plans in my head. I am living abroad at present, and
want to get back as quickly as possible. Will you please tell me where
our furniture is? I should like to take out one or two books; the rest
are for you.

“Forgive me, dearest Meg. This must read like rather a tiresome letter,
but all letters are from your loving

“HELEN.”


It was a tiresome letter, for it tempted Margaret to tell a lie. If
she wrote that Aunt Juley was still in danger her sister would come.
Unhealthiness is contagious. We cannot be in contact with those who are
in a morbid state without ourselves deteriorating. To “act for the best”
 might do Helen good, but would do herself harm, and, at the risk of
disaster, she kept her colours flying a little longer. She replied that
their aunt was much better, and awaited developments.

Tibby approved of her reply. Mellowing rapidly, he was a pleasanter
companion than before. Oxford had done much for him. He had lost his
peevishness, and could hide his indifference to people and his interest
in food. But he had not grown more human. The years between eighteen and
twenty-two, so magical for most, were leading him gently from boyhood to
middle age. He had never known young-manliness, that quality which warms
the heart till death, and gives Mr. Wilcox an imperishable charm. He
was frigid, through no fault of his own, and without cruelty. He thought
Helen wrong and Margaret right, but the family trouble was for him what
a scene behind footlights is for most people. He had only one suggestion
to make, and that was characteristic.

“Why don’t you tell Mr. Wilcox?”

“About Helen?”

“Perhaps he has come across that sort of thing.”

“He would do all he could, but--”

“Oh, you know best. But he is practical.”

It was the student’s belief in experts. Margaret demurred for one or two
reasons. Presently Helen’s answer came. She sent a telegram requesting
the address of the furniture, as she would now return at once. Margaret
replied, “Certainly not; meet me at the bankers’ at four.” She and Tibby
went up to London. Helen was not at the bankers’, and they were refused
her address. Helen had passed into chaos.

Margaret put her arm round her brother. He was all that she had left,
and never had he seemed more unsubstantial.

“Tibby love, what next?”

He replied: “It is extraordinary.”

“Dear, your judgment’s often clearer than mine. Have you any notion
what’s at the back?”

“None, unless it’s something mental.”

“Oh--that!” said Margaret. “Quite impossible.” But the suggestion had
been uttered, and in a few minutes she took it up herself. Nothing else
explained. And London agreed with Tibby. The mask fell off the city, and
she saw it for what it really is--a caricature of infinity. The familiar
barriers, the streets along which she moved, the houses between which
she had made her little journeys for so many years, became negligible
suddenly. Helen seemed one with grimy trees and the traffic and the
slowly-flowing slabs of mud. She had accomplished a hideous act of
renunciation and returned to the One. Margaret’s own faith held firm.
She knew the human soul will be merged, if it be merged at all, with the
stars and the sea. Yet she felt that her sister had been going amiss for
many years. It was symbolic the catastrophe should come now, on a London
afternoon, while rain fell slowly.

Henry was the only hope. Henry was definite. He might know of some paths
in the chaos that were hidden from them, and she determined to take
Tibby’s advice and lay the whole matter in his hands. They must call at
his office. He could not well make it worse. She went for a few moments
into St. Paul’s, whose dome stands out of the welter so bravely, as
if preaching the gospel of form. But within, St. Paul’s is as its
surroundings--echoes and whispers, inaudible songs, invisible mosaics,
wet footmarks, crossing and recrossing the floor. Si monumentum
requiris, circumspice; it points us back to London. There was no hope of
Helen here.

Henry was unsatisfactory at first. That she had expected. He was
overjoyed to see her back from Swanage, and slow to admit the growth of
a new trouble. When they told him of their search, he only chaffed Tibby
and the Schlegels generally, and declared that it was “just like Helen”
 to lead her relatives a dance.

“That is what we all say,” replied Margaret. “But why should it be
just like Helen? Why should she be allowed to be so queer, and to grow
queerer?”

“Don’t ask me. I’m a plain man of business. I live and let live. My
advice to you both is, don’t worry. Margaret, you’ve got black marks
again under your eyes. You know that’s strictly forbidden. First
your aunt--then your sister. No, we aren’t going to have it. Are we,
Theobald?” He rang the bell. “I’ll give you some tea, and then you go
straight to Ducie Street. I can’t have my girl looking as old as her
husband.”

“All the same, you have not quite seen our point,” said Tibby.

Mr. Wilcox, who was in good spirits, retorted, “I don’t suppose I ever
shall.” He leant back, laughing at the gifted but ridiculous family,
while the fire flickered over the map of Africa. Margaret motioned to
her brother to go on. Rather diffident, he obeyed her.

“Margaret’s point is this,” he said. “Our sister may be mad.”

Charles, who was working in the inner room, looked round.

“Come in, Charles,” said Margaret kindly. “Could you help us at all? We
are again in trouble.”

“I’m afraid I cannot. What are the facts? We are all mad more or less,
you know, in these days.”

“The facts are as follows,” replied Tibby, who had at times a pedantic
lucidity. “The facts are that she has been in England for three days and
will not see us. She has forbidden the bankers to give us her address.
She refuses to answer questions. Margaret finds her letters colourless.
There are other facts, but these are the most striking.”

“She has never behaved like this before, then?” asked Henry.

“Of course not!” said his wife, with a frown.

“Well, my dear, how am I to know?”

A senseless spasm of annoyance came over her. “You know quite well that
Helen never sins against affection,” she said. “You must have noticed
that much in her, surely.”

“Oh yes; she and I have always hit it off together.”

“No, Henry--can’t you see?--I don’t mean that.”

She recovered herself, but not before Charles had observed her. Stupid
and attentive, he was watching the scene.

“I was meaning that when she was eccentric in the past, one could trace
it back to the heart in the long-run. She behaved oddly because she
cared for some one, or wanted to help them. There’s no possible excuse
for her now. She is grieving us deeply, and that is why I am sure that
she is not well. ‘Mad’ is too terrible a word, but she is not well.
I shall never believe it. I shouldn’t discuss my sister with you if I
thought she was well--trouble you about her, I mean.”

Henry began to grow serious. Ill-health was to him something perfectly
definite. Generally well himself, he could not realise that we sink to
it by slow gradations. The sick had no rights; they were outside the
pale; one could lie to them remorselessly. When his first wife was
seized, he had promised to take her down into Hertfordshire, but
meanwhile arranged with a nursing-home instead. Helen, too, was ill. And
the plan that he sketched out for her capture, clever and well-meaning
as it was, drew its ethics from the wolf-pack.

“You want to get hold of her?” he said. “That’s the problem, isn’t it?
She has got to see a doctor.”

“For all I know she has seen one already.”

“Yes, yes; don’t interrupt.” He rose to his feet and thought intently.
The genial, tentative host disappeared, and they saw instead the man who
had carved money out of Greece and Africa, and bought forests from the
natives for a few bottles of gin. “I’ve got it,” he said at last. “It’s
perfectly easy. Leave it to me. We’ll send her down to Howards End.”

“How will you do that?”

“After her books. Tell her that she must unpack them herself. Then you
can meet her there.”

“But, Henry, that’s just what she won’t let me do. It’s part of
her--whatever it is--never to see me.”

“Of course you won’t tell her you’re going. When she is there, looking
at the cases, you’ll just stroll in. If nothing is wrong with her, so
much the better. But there’ll be the motor round the corner, and we can
run her to a specialist in no time.”

Margaret shook her head. “It’s quite impossible.”

“Why?”

“It doesn’t seem impossible to me,” said Tibby; “it is surely a very
tippy plan.”

“It is impossible, because--” She looked at her husband sadly. “It’s not
the particular language that Helen and I talk, if you see my meaning. It
would do splendidly for other people, whom I don’t blame.”

“But Helen doesn’t talk,” said Tibby. “That’s our whole difficulty. She
won’t talk your particular language, and on that account you think she’s
ill.”

“No, Henry; it’s sweet of you, but I couldn’t.”

“I see,” he said; “you have scruples.”

“I suppose so.”

“And sooner than go against them you would have your sister suffer. You
could have got her down to Swanage by a word, but you had scruples. And
scruples are all very well. I am as scrupulous as any man alive, I hope;
but when it is a case like this, when there is a question of madness--”

“I deny it’s madness.”

“You said just now--”

“It’s madness when I say it, but not when you say it.”

Henry shrugged his shoulders. “Margaret! Margaret!” he groaned. “No
education can teach a woman logic. Now, my dear, my time is valuable. Do
you want me to help you or not?”

“Not in that way.”

“Answer my question. Plain question, plain answer. Do--”

Charles surprised them by interrupting. “Pater, we may as well keep
Howards End out of it,” he said.

“Why, Charles?”

Charles could give no reason; but Margaret felt as if, over tremendous
distance, a salutation had passed between them.

“The whole house is at sixes and sevens,” he said crossly. “We don’t
want any more mess.”

“Who’s ‘we’?” asked his father. “My boy, pray who’s ‘we’?”

“I am sure I beg your pardon,” said Charles. “I appear always to be
intruding.”

By now Margaret wished she had never mentioned her trouble to her
husband. Retreat was impossible. He was determined to push the matter
to a satisfactory conclusion, and Helen faded as he talked. Her fair,
flying hair and eager eyes counted for nothing, for she was ill, without
rights, and any of her friends might hunt her. Sick at heart, Margaret
joined in the chase. She wrote her sister a lying letter, at her
husband’s dictation; she said the furniture was all at Howards End, but
could be seen on Monday next at 3 P.M., when a charwoman would be in
attendance. It was a cold letter, and the more plausible for that. Helen
would think she was offended. And on Monday next she and Henry were to
lunch with Dolly, and then ambush themselves in the garden.

After they had gone, Mr. Wilcox said to his son: “I can’t have this sort
of behaviour, my boy. Margaret’s too sweet-natured to mind, but I mind
for her.”

Charles made no answer.

“Is anything wrong with you, Charles, this afternoon?”

“No, pater; but you may be taking on a bigger business than you reckon.”

“How?”

“Don’t ask me.”



CHAPTER XXXV

One speaks of the moods of spring, but the days that are her true
children have only one mood; they are all full of the rising and
dropping of winds, and the whistling of birds. New flowers may come out,
the green embroidery of the hedges increase, but the same heaven broods
overhead, soft, thick, and blue, the same figures, seen and unseen, are
wandering by coppice and meadow. The morning that Margaret had spent
with Miss Avery, and the afternoon she set out to entrap Helen, were the
scales of a single balance. Time might never have moved, rain never
have fallen, and man alone, with his schemes and ailments, was troubling
Nature until he saw her through a veil of tears.

She protested no more. Whether Henry was right or wrong, he was most
kind, and she knew of no other standard by which to judge him. She
must trust him absolutely. As soon as he had taken up a business, his
obtuseness vanished. He profited by the slightest indications, and the
capture of Helen promised to be staged as deftly as the marriage of
Evie.

They went down in the morning as arranged, and he discovered that their
victim was actually in Hilton. On his arrival he called at all
the livery-stables in the village, and had a few minutes’ serious
conversation with the proprietors. What he said, Margaret did not
know--perhaps not the truth; but news arrived after lunch that a lady
had come by the London train, and had taken a fly to Howards End.

“She was bound to drive,” said Henry. “There will be her books.”

“I cannot make it out,” said Margaret for the hundredth time.

“Finish your coffee, dear. We must be off.”

“Yes, Margaret, you know you must take plenty,” said Dolly.

Margaret tried, but suddenly lifted her hand to her eyes. Dolly stole
glances at her father-in-law which he did not answer. In the silence the
motor came round to the door.

“You’re not fit for it,” he said anxiously. “Let me go alone. I know
exactly what to do.”

“Oh yes, I am fit,” said Margaret, uncovering her face. “Only most
frightfully worried. I cannot feel that Helen is really alive. Her
letters and telegrams seem to have come from some one else. Her voice
isn’t in them. I don’t believe your driver really saw her at the
station. I wish I’d never mentioned it. I know that Charles is vexed.
Yes, he is--” She seized Dolly’s hand and kissed it. “There, Dolly will
forgive me. There. Now we’ll be off.”

Henry had been looking at her closely. He did not like this breakdown.

“Don’t you want to tidy yourself?” he asked.

“Have I time?”

“Yes, plenty.”

She went to the lavatory by the front door, and as soon as the bolt
slipped, Mr. Wilcox said quietly:

“Dolly, I’m going without her.”

Dolly’s eyes lit up with vulgar excitement. She followed him on tiptoe
out to the car.

“Tell her I thought it best.”

“Yes, Mr. Wilcox, I see.”

“Say anything you like. All right.”

The car started well, and with ordinary luck would have got away. But
Porgly-woggles, who was playing in the garden, chose this moment to sit
down in the middle of the path. Crane, in trying to pass him, ran one
wheel over a bed of wallflowers. Dolly screamed. Margaret, hearing the
noise, rushed out hatless, and was in time to jump on the footboard.
She said not a single word; he was only treating her as she had treated
Helen, and her rage at his dishonesty only helped to indicate what Helen
would feel against them. She thought, “I deserve it; I am punished for
lowering my colours.” And she accepted his apologies with a calmness
that astonished him.

“I still consider you are not fit for it,” he kept saying.

“Perhaps I was not at lunch. But the whole thing is spread clearly
before me now.”

“I was meaning to act for the best.”

“Just lend me your scarf, will you. This wind takes one’s hair so.”

“Certainly, dear girl. Are you all right now?”

“Look! My hands have stopped trembling.”

“And have quite forgiven me? Then listen. Her cab should already have
arrived at Howards End. (We’re a little late, but no matter.) Our first
move will be to send it down to wait at the farm, as, if possible, one
doesn’t want a scene before servants. A certain gentleman”--he pointed
at Crane’s back--“won’t drive in, but will wait a little short of the
front gate, behind the laurels. Have you still the keys of the house?”

“Yes.”

“Well, they aren’t wanted. Do you remember how the house stands?”

“Yes.”

“If we don’t find her in the porch, we can stroll round into the garden.
Our object--”

Here they stopped to pick up the doctor.

“I was just saying to my wife, Mansbridge, that our main object is not
to frighten Miss Schlegel. The house, as you know, is my property, so it
should seem quite natural for us to be there. The trouble is evidently
nervous--wouldn’t you say so, Margaret?”

The doctor, a very young man, began to ask questions about Helen. Was
she normal? Was there anything congenital or hereditary? Had anything
occurred that was likely to alienate her from her family?

“Nothing,” answered Margaret, wondering what would have happened if she
had added: “Though she did resent my husband’s immorality.”

“She always was highly strung,” pursued Henry, leaning back in the
car as it shot past the church. “A tendency to spiritualism and those
things, though nothing serious. Musical, literary, artistic, but I
should say normal--a very charming girl.”

Margaret’s anger and terror increased every moment. How dare these
men label her sister! What horrors lay ahead! What impertinences that
shelter under the name of science! The pack was turning on Helen, to
deny her human rights, and it seemed to Margaret that all Schlegels were
threatened with her. “Were they normal?” What a question to ask! And it
is always those who know nothing about human nature, who are bored by
psychology--and shocked by physiology, who ask it. However piteous her
sister’s state, she knew that she must be on her side. They would be mad
together if the world chose to consider them so.

It was now five minutes past three. The car slowed down by the farm, in
the yard of which Miss Avery was standing. Henry asked her whether a cab
had gone past. She nodded, and the next moment they caught sight of it,
at the end of the lane. The car ran silently like a beast of prey. So
unsuspicious was Helen that she was sitting in the porch, with her back
to the road. She had come. Only her head and shoulders were visible. She
sat framed in the vine, and one of her hands played with the buds. The
wind ruffled her hair, the sun glorified it; she was as she had always
been.

Margaret was seated next to the door. Before her husband could prevent
her, she slipped out. She ran to the garden gate, which was shut, passed
through it, and deliberately pushed it in his face. The noise alarmed
Helen. Margaret saw her rise with an unfamiliar movement, and, rushing
into the porch, learnt the simple explanation of all their fears--her
sister was with child.

“Is the truant all right?” called Henry.

She had time to whisper: “Oh, my darling--” The keys of the house were
in her hand. She unlocked Howards End and thrust Helen into it. “Yes,
all right,” she said, and stood with her back to the door.


CHAPTER XXXVI

“Margaret, you look upset!” said Henry.

Mansbridge had followed. Crane was at the gate, and the flyman had stood
up on the box. Margaret shook her head at them; she could not speak any
more. She remained clutching the keys, as if all their future depended
on them. Henry was asking more questions. She shook her head again. His
words had no sense. She heard him wonder why she had let Helen in. “You
might have given me a knock with the gate,” was another of his remarks.
Presently she heard herself speaking. She, or someone for her, said, “Go
away.” Henry came nearer. He repeated, “Margaret, you look upset again.
My dear, give me the keys. What are you doing with Helen?”

“Oh, dearest, do go away, and I will manage it all.”

“Manage what?”

He stretched out his hand for the keys. She might have obeyed if it had
not been for the doctor.

“Stop that at least,” she said piteously; the doctor had turned back,
and was questioning the driver of Helen’s cab. A new feeling came over
her; she was fighting for women against men. She did not care about
rights, but if men came into Howards End, it should be over her body.

“Come, this is an odd beginning,” said her husband.

The doctor came forward now, and whispered two words to Mr. Wilcox--the
scandal was out. Sincerely horrified, Henry stood gazing at the earth.

“I cannot help it,” said Margaret. “Do wait. It’s not my fault. Please
all four of you go away now.”

Now the flyman was whispering to Crane.

“We are relying on you to help us, Mrs. Wilcox,” said the young doctor.
“Could you go in and persuade your sister to come out?”

“On what grounds?” said Margaret, suddenly looking him straight in the
eyes.

Thinking it professional to prevaricate, he murmured something about a
nervous breakdown.

“I beg your pardon, but it is nothing of the sort. You are not qualified
to attend my sister, Mr. Mansbridge. If we require your services, we
will let you know.”

“I can diagnose the case more bluntly if you wish,” he retorted.

“You could, but you have not. You are, therefore, not qualified to
attend my sister.”

“Come, come, Margaret!” said Henry, never raising his eyes. “This is a
terrible business, an appalling business. It’s doctor’s orders. Open the
door.”

“Forgive me, but I will not.”

“I don’t agree.”

Margaret was silent.

“This business is as broad as it’s long,” contributed the doctor. “We
had better all work together. You need us, Mrs. Wilcox, and we need
you.”

“Quite so,” said Henry.

“I do not need you in the least,” said Margaret.

The two men looked at each other anxiously.

“No more does my sister, who is still many weeks from her confinement.”

“Margaret, Margaret!”

“Well, Henry, send your doctor away. What possible use is he now?”

Mr. Wilcox ran his eye over the house. He had a vague feeling that he
must stand firm and support the doctor. He himself might need support,
for there was trouble ahead.

“It all turns on affection now,” said Margaret. “Affection. Don’t you
see?” Resuming her usual methods, she wrote the word on the house with
her finger. “Surely you see. I like Helen very much, you not so much.
Mr. Mansbridge doesn’t know her. That’s all. And affection, when
reciprocated, gives rights. Put that down in your note-book, Mr.
Mansbridge. It’s a useful formula.”

Henry told her to be calm.

“You don’t know what you want yourselves,” said Margaret, folding her
arms. “For one sensible remark I will let you in. But you cannot make
it. You would trouble my sister for no reason. I will not permit it.
I’ll stand here all the day sooner.”

“Mansbridge,” said Henry in a low voice, “perhaps not now.”

The pack was breaking up. At a sign from his master, Crane also went
back into the car.

“Now, Henry, you,” she said gently. None of her bitterness had been
directed at him. “Go away now, dear. I shall want your advice later, no
doubt. Forgive me if I have been cross. But, seriously, you must go.”

He was too stupid to leave her. Now it was Mr. Mansbridge who called in
a low voice to him.

“I shall soon find you down at Dolly’s,” she called, as the gate at last
clanged between them. The fly moved out of the way, the motor backed,
turned a little, backed again, and turned in the narrow road. A string
of farm carts came up in the middle; but she waited through all, for
there was no hurry. When all was over and the car had started, she
opened the door. “Oh, my darling!” she said. “My darling, forgive me.”
 Helen was standing in the hall.



CHAPTER XXXVII

Margaret bolted the door on the inside. Then she would have kissed her
sister, but Helen, in a dignified voice, that came strangely from her,
said:

“Convenient! You did not tell me that the books were unpacked. I have
found nearly everything that I want.”

“I told you nothing that was true.”

“It has been a great surprise, certainly. Has Aunt Juley been ill?”

“Helen, you wouldn’t think I’d invent that?”

“I suppose not,” said Helen, turning away, and crying a very little.
“But one loses faith in everything after this.”

“We thought it was illness, but even then--I haven’t behaved worthily.”

Helen selected another book.

“I ought not to have consulted any one. What would our father have
thought of me?”

She did not think of questioning her sister, or of rebuking her. Both
might be necessary in the future, but she had first to purge a greater
crime than any that Helen could have committed--that want of confidence
that is the work of the devil.

“Yes, I am annoyed,” replied Helen. “My wishes should have been
respected. I would have gone through this meeting if it was necessary,
but after Aunt Juley recovered, it was not necessary. Planning my life,
as I now have to do.”

“Come away from those books,” called Margaret. “Helen, do talk to me.”

“I was just saying that I have stopped living haphazard. One can’t go
through a great deal of --”--she left out the noun--“without planning one’s
actions in advance. I am going to have a child in June, and in the first
place conversations, discussions, excitement, are not good for me. I
will go through them if necessary, but only then. In the second place I
have no right to trouble people. I cannot fit in with England as I know
it. I have done something that the English never pardon. It would not be
right for them to pardon it. So I must live where I am not known.”

“But why didn’t you tell me, dearest?”

“Yes,” replied Helen judicially. “I might have, but decided to wait.”

“I believe you would never have told me.”

“Oh yes, I should. We have taken a flat in Munich.”

Margaret glanced out of the window.

“By ‘we’ I mean myself and Monica. But for her, I am and have been and
always wish to be alone.”

“I have not heard of Monica.”

“You wouldn’t have. She’s an Italian--by birth at least. She makes her
living by journalism. I met her originally on Garda. Monica is much the
best person to see me through.”

“You are very fond of her, then.”

“She has been extraordinarily sensible with me.”

Margaret guessed at Monica’s type--“Italiano Inglesiato” they had named
it--the crude feminist of the South, whom one respects but avoids. And
Helen had turned to it in her need!

“You must not think that we shall never meet,” said Helen, with a
measured kindness. “I shall always have a room for you when you can be
spared, and the longer you can be with me the better. But you haven’t
understood yet, Meg, and of course it is very difficult for you. This is
a shock to you. It isn’t to me, who have been thinking over our futures
for many months, and they won’t be changed by a slight contretemps, such
as this. I cannot live in England.”

“Helen, you’ve not forgiven me for my treachery. You COULDN’T talk like
this to me if you had.”

“Oh, Meg dear, why do we talk at all?” She dropped a book and sighed
wearily. Then, recovering herself, she said: “Tell me, how is it that
all the books are down here?”

“Series of mistakes.”

“And a great deal of furniture has been unpacked.”

“All.”

“Who lives here, then?”

“No one.”

“I suppose you are letting it, though.”

“The house is dead,” said Margaret, with a frown. “Why worry on about
it?”

“But I am interested. You talk as if I had lost all my interest in life.
I am still Helen, I hope. Now this hasn’t the feel of a dead house.
The hall seems more alive even than in the old days, when it held the
Wilcoxes’ own things.”

“Interested, are you? Very well, I must tell you, I suppose. My husband
lent it on condition we--but by a mistake all our things were unpacked,
and Miss Avery, instead of--” She stopped. “Look here, I can’t go on
like this. I warn you I won’t. Helen, why should you be so miserably
unkind to me, simply because you hate Henry?”

“I don’t hate him now,” said Helen. “I have stopped being a schoolgirl,
and, Meg, once again, I’m not being unkind. But as for fitting in with
your English life--no, put it out of your head at once. Imagine a visit
from me at Ducie Street! It’s unthinkable.”

Margaret could not contradict her. It was appalling to see her quietly
moving forward with her plans, not bitter or excitable, neither
asserting innocence nor confessing guilt, merely desiring freedom and
the company of those who would not blame her. She had been through--how
much? Margaret did not know. But it was enough to part her from old
habits as well as old friends.

“Tell me about yourself,” said Helen, who had chosen her books, and was
lingering over the furniture.

“There’s nothing to tell.”

“But your marriage has been happy, Meg?”

“Yes, but I don’t feel inclined to talk.”

“You feel as I do.”

“Not that, but I can’t.”

“No more can I. It is a nuisance, but no good trying.”

Something had come between them. Perhaps it was Society, which
henceforward would exclude Helen. Perhaps it was a third life, already
potent as a spirit. They could find no meeting-place. Both suffered
acutely, and were not comforted by the knowledge that affection
survived.

“Look here, Meg, is the coast clear?”

“You mean that you want to go away from me?”

“I suppose so--dear old lady! it isn’t any use. I knew we should have
nothing to say. Give my love to Aunt Juley and Tibby, and take more
yourself than I can say. Promise to come and see me in Munich later.”

“Certainly, dearest.”

“For that is all we can do.”

It seemed so. Most ghastly of all was Helen’s common sense; Monica had
been extraordinarily good for her.

“I am glad to have seen you and the things.” She looked at the bookcase
lovingly, as if she was saying farewell to the past.

Margaret unbolted the door. She remarked: “The car has gone, and here’s
your cab.”

She led the way to it, glancing at the leaves and the sky. The spring
had never seemed more beautiful. The driver, who was leaning on the
gate, called out, “Please, lady, a message,” and handed her Henry’s
visiting-card through the bars.

“How did this come?” she asked.

Crane had returned with it almost at once.

She read the card with annoyance. It was covered with instructions in
domestic French. When she and her sister had talked she was to come back
for the night to Dolly’s. “Il faut dormir sur ce sujet.” while Helen
was to be found une comfortable chambre a l’hotel. The final sentence
displeased her greatly until she remembered that the Charles’s had only
one spare room, and so could not invite a third guest.

“Henry would have done what he could,” she interpreted.

Helen had not followed her into the garden. The door once open, she lost
her inclination to fly. She remained in the hall, going from bookcase to
table. She grew more like the old Helen, irresponsible and charming.

“This IS Mr. Wilcox’s house?” she inquired.

“Surely you remember Howards End?”

“Remember? I who remember everything! But it looks to be ours now.”

“Miss Avery was extraordinary,” said Margaret, her own spirits
lightening a little. Again she was invaded by a slight feeling of
disloyalty. But it brought her relief, and she yielded to it. “She loved
Mrs. Wilcox, and would rather furnish her home with our things than
think of it empty. In consequence here are all the library books.”

“Not all the books. She hasn’t unpacked the Art books, in which she may
show her sense. And we never used to have the sword here.”

“The sword looks well, though.”

“Magnificent.”

“Yes, doesn’t it?”

“Where’s the piano, Meg?”

“I warehoused that in London. Why?”

“Nothing.”

“Curious, too, that the carpet fits.”

“The carpet’s a mistake,” announced Helen. “I know that we had it in
London, but this floor ought to be bare. It is far too beautiful.”

“You still have a mania for under-furnishing. Would you care to come
into the dining-room before you start? There’s no carpet there.”

They went in, and each minute their talk became more natural.

“Oh, WHAT a place for mother’s chiffonier!” cried Helen.

“Look at the chairs, though.”

“Oh, look at them! Wickham Place faced north, didn’t it?”

“North-west.”

“Anyhow, it is thirty years since any of those chairs have felt the sun.
Feel. Their dear little backs are quite warm.”

“But why has Miss Avery made them set to partners? I shall just--”

“Over here, Meg. Put it so that any one sitting will see the lawn.”

Margaret moved a chair. Helen sat down in it.

“Ye--es. The window’s too high.”

“Try a drawing-room chair.”

“No, I don’t like the drawing-room so much. The beam has been
match-boarded. It would have been so beautiful otherwise.”

“Helen, what a memory you have for some things! You’re perfectly right.
It’s a room that men have spoilt through trying to make it nice for
women. Men don’t know what we want--”

“And never will.”

“I don’t agree. In two thousand years they’ll know. Look where Tibby
spilt the soup.”

“Coffee. It was coffee surely.”

Helen shook her head. “Impossible. Tibby was far too young to be given
coffee at that time.”

“Was father alive?”

“Yes.”

“Then you’re right and it must have been soup. I was thinking of much
later--that unsuccessful visit of Aunt Juley’s, when she didn’t realise
that Tibby had grown up. It was coffee then, for he threw it down on
purpose. There was some rhyme, ‘Tea, coffee--coffee tea,’ that she said
to him every morning at breakfast. Wait a minute--how did it go?”

“I know--no, I don’t. What a detestable boy Tibby was!”

“But the rhyme was simply awful. No decent person could put up with it.”

“Ah, that greengage-tree,” cried Helen, as if the garden was also part
of their childhood. “Why do I connect it with dumb-bells? And there come
the chickens. The grass wants cutting. I love yellow-hammers.”

Margaret interrupted her. “I have got it,” she announced.

       “‘Tea, tea, coffee, tea,
         Or chocolaritee.’

“That every morning for three weeks. No wonder Tibby was wild.”

“Tibby is moderately a dear now,” said Helen.

“There! I knew you’d say that in the end. Of course he’s a dear.”

A bell rang.

“Listen! what’s that?”

Helen said, “Perhaps the Wilcoxes are beginning the siege.”

“What nonsense--listen!”

And the triviality faded from their faces, though it left something
behind--the knowledge that they never could be parted because their love
was rooted in common things. Explanations and appeals had failed; they
had tried for a common meeting-ground, and had only made each other
unhappy. And all the time their salvation was lying round them--the past
sanctifying the present; the present, with wild heart-throb, declaring
that there would after all be a future with laughter and the voices of
children. Helen, still smiling, came up to her sister. She said, “It
is always Meg.” They looked into each other’s eyes. The inner life had
paid.

Solemnly the clapper tolled. No one was in the front. Margaret went to
the kitchen, and struggled between packing-cases to the window. Their
visitor was only a little boy with a tin can. And triviality returned.

“Little boy, what do you want?”

“Please, I am the milk.”

“Did Miss Avery send you?” said Margaret, rather sharply.

“Yes, please.”

“Then take it back and say we require no milk.” While she called to
Helen, “No, it’s not the siege, but possibly an attempt to provision us
against one.”

“But I like milk,” cried Helen. “Why send it away?”

“Do you? Oh, very well. But we’ve nothing to put it in, and he wants the
can.”

“Please, I’m to call in the morning for the can,” said the boy.

“The house will be locked up then.”

“In the morning would I bring eggs too?”

“Are you the boy whom I saw playing in the stacks last week?”

The child hung his head.

“Well, run away and do it again.”

“Nice little boy,” whispered Helen. “I say, what’s your name? Mine’s
Helen.”

“Tom.”

That was Helen all over. The Wilcoxes, too, would ask a child its name,
but they never told their names in return.

“Tom, this one here is Margaret. And at home we’ve another called Tibby.”

“Mine are lop-eareds,” replied Tom, supposing Tibby to be a rabbit.

“You’re a very good and rather a clever little boy. Mind you come
again.--Isn’t he charming?”

“Undoubtedly,” said Margaret. “He is probably the son of Madge, and
Madge is dreadful. But this place has wonderful powers.”

“What do you mean?”

“I don’t know.”

“Because I probably agree with you.”

“It kills what is dreadful and makes what is beautiful live.”

“I do agree,” said Helen, as she sipped the milk. “But you said that the
house was dead not half an hour ago.”

“Meaning that I was dead. I felt it.”

“Yes, the house has a surer life than we, even if it was empty, and, as
it is, I can’t get over that for thirty years the sun has never shone
full on our furniture. After all, Wickham Place was a grave. Meg, I’ve a
startling idea.”

“What is it?”

“Drink some milk to steady you.”

Margaret obeyed.

“No, I won’t tell you yet,” said Helen, “because you may laugh or be
angry. Let’s go upstairs first and give the rooms an airing.”

They opened window after window, till the inside, too, was rustling
to the spring. Curtains blew, picture frames tapped cheerfully. Helen
uttered cries of excitement as she found this bed obviously in its right
place, that in its wrong one. She was angry with Miss Avery for not
having moved the wardrobes up. “Then one would see really.” She admired
the view. She was the Helen who had written the memorable letters four
years ago. As they leant out, looking westward, she said: “About my
idea. Couldn’t you and I camp out in this house for the night?”

“I don’t think we could well do that,” said Margaret.

“Here are beds, tables, towels--”

“I know; but the house isn’t supposed to be slept in, and Henry’s
suggestion was--”

“I require no suggestions. I shall not alter anything in my plans. But
it would give me so much pleasure to have one night here with you. It
will be something to look back on. Oh, Meg lovey, do let’s!”

“But, Helen, my pet,” said Margaret, “we can’t without getting Henry’s
leave. Of course, he would give it, but you said yourself that you
couldn’t visit at Ducie Street now, and this is equally intimate.”

“Ducie Street is his house. This is ours. Our furniture, our sort of
people coming to the door. Do let us camp out, just one night, and Tom
shall feed us on eggs and milk. Why not? It’s a moon.”

Margaret hesitated. “I feel Charles wouldn’t like it,” she said at last.
“Even our furniture annoyed him, and I was going to clear it out when
Aunt Juley’s illness prevented me. I sympathise with Charles. He feels
it’s his mother’s house. He loves it in rather an untaking way. Henry I
could answer for--not Charles.”

“I know he won’t like it,” said Helen. “But I am going to pass out of
their lives. What difference will it make in the long run if they say,
‘And she even spent the night at Howards End’?”

“How do you know you’ll pass out of their lives? We have thought that
twice before.”

“Because my plans--”

“--which you change in a moment.”

“Then because my life is great and theirs are little,” said Helen,
taking fire. “I know of things they can’t know of, and so do you. We
know that there’s poetry. We know that there’s death. They can only take
them on hearsay. We know this is our house, because it feels ours. Oh,
they may take the title-deeds and the door-keys, but for this one night
we are at home.”

“It would be lovely to have you once more alone,” said Margaret. “It may
be a chance in a thousand.”

“Yes, and we could talk.” She dropped her voice. “It won’t be a
very glorious story. But under that wych-elm--honestly, I see little
happiness ahead. Cannot I have this one night with you?”

“I needn’t say how much it would mean to me.”

“Then let us.”

“It is no good hesitating. Shall I drive down to Hilton now and get
leave?”

“Oh, we don’t want leave.”

But Margaret was a loyal wife. In spite of imagination and
poetry--perhaps on account of them--she could sympathise with the
technical attitude that Henry would adopt. If possible, she would be
technical, too. A night’s lodging--and they demanded no more--need not
involve the discussion of general principles.

“Charles may say no,” grumbled Helen.

“We shan’t consult him.”

“Go if you like; I should have stopped without leave.”

It was the touch of selfishness, which was not enough to mar Helen’s
character, and even added to its beauty. She would have stopped without
leave and escaped to Germany the next morning. Margaret kissed her.

“Expect me back before dark. I am looking forward to it so much. It is
like you to have thought of such a beautiful thing.”

“Not a thing, only an ending,” said Helen rather sadly; and the sense of
tragedy closed in on Margaret again as soon as she left the house.

She was afraid of Miss Avery. It is disquieting to fulfil a prophecy,
however superficially. She was glad to see no watching figure as she
drove past the farm, but only little Tom, turning somersaults in the
straw.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

The tragedy began quietly enough, and, like many another talk, by the
man’s deft assertion of his superiority. Henry heard her arguing with
the driver, stepped out and settled the fellow, who was inclined to be
rude, and then led the way to some chairs on the lawn. Dolly, who
had not been “told,” ran out with offers of tea. He refused them, and
ordered them to wheel baby’s perambulator away, as they desired to be
alone.

“But the diddums can’t listen; he isn’t nine months old,” she pleaded.

“That’s not what I was saying,” retorted her father-in-law.

Baby was wheeled out of earshot, and did not hear about the crisis till
later years. It was now the turn of Margaret.

“Is it what we feared?” he asked.

“It is.”

“Dear girl,” he began, “there is a troublesome business ahead of us,
and nothing but the most absolute honesty and plain speech will see
us through.” Margaret bent her head. “I am obliged to question you on
subjects we’d both prefer to leave untouched. As you know, I am not one
of your Bernard Shaws who consider nothing sacred. To speak as I must
will pain me, but there are occasions--We are husband and wife, not
children. I am a man of the world, and you are a most exceptional
woman.”

All Margaret’s senses forsook her. She blushed, and looked past him at
the Six Hills, covered with spring herbage. Noting her colour, he grew
still more kind.

“I see that you feel as I felt when--My poor little wife! Oh, be brave!
Just one or two questions, and I have done with you. Was your sister
wearing a wedding-ring?”

Margaret stammered a “No.”

There was an appalling silence.

“Henry, I really came to ask a favour about Howards End.”

“One point at a time. I am now obliged to ask for the name of her
seducer.”

She rose to her feet and held the chair between them. Her colour had
ebbed, and she was grey. It did not displease him that she should
receive his question thus.

“Take your time,” he counselled her. “Remember that this is far worse
for me than for you.”

She swayed; he feared she was going to faint. Then speech came, and she
said slowly: “Seducer? No; I do not know her seducer’s name.”

“Would she not tell you?”

“I never even asked her who seduced her,” said Margaret, dwelling on the
hateful word thoughtfully.

“That is singular.” Then he changed his mind. “Natural perhaps, dear
girl, that you shouldn’t ask. But until his name is known, nothing can
be done. Sit down. How terrible it is to see you so upset! I knew you
weren’t fit for it. I wish I hadn’t taken you.”

Margaret answered, “I like to stand, if you don’t mind, for it gives me
a pleasant view of the Six Hills.”

“As you like.”

“Have you anything else to ask me, Henry?”

“Next you must tell me whether you have gathered anything. I have often
noticed your insight, dear. I only wish my own was as good. You may have
guessed something, even though your sister said nothing. The slightest
hint would help us.”

“Who is ‘we’?”

“I thought it best to ring up Charles.”

“That was unnecessary,” said Margaret, growing warmer. “This news will
give Charles disproportionate pain.”

“He has at once gone to call on your brother.”

“That too was unnecessary.”

“Let me explain, dear, how the matter stands. You don’t think that I and
my son are other than gentlemen? It is in Helen’s interests that we are
acting. It is still not too late to save her name.”

Then Margaret hit out for the first time. “Are we to make her seducer
marry her?” she asked.

“If possible, yes.”

“But, Henry, suppose he turned out to be married already? One has heard
of such cases.”

“In that case he must pay heavily for his misconduct, and be thrashed
within an inch of his life.”

So her first blow missed. She was thankful of it. What had tempted her
to imperil both of their lives. Henry’s obtuseness had saved her as well
as himself. Exhausted with anger, she sat down again, blinking at him as
he told her as much as he thought fit. At last she said: “May I ask you
my question now?”

“Certainly, my dear.”

“To-morrow Helen goes to Munich--”

“Well, possibly she is right.”

“Henry, let a lady finish. To-morrow she goes; to-night, with your
permission, she would like to sleep at Howards End.”

It was the crisis of his life. Again she would have recalled the words
as soon as they were uttered. She had not led up to them with sufficient
care. She longed to warn him that they were far more important than
he supposed. She saw him weighing them, as if they were a business
proposition.

“Why Howards End?” he said at last. “Would she not be more comfortable,
as I suggested, at the hotel?”

Margaret hastened to give him reasons. “It is an odd request, but you
know what Helen is and what women in her state are.” He frowned, and
moved irritably. “She has the idea that one night in your house would
give her pleasure and do her good. I think she’s right. Being one of
those imaginative girls, the presence of all our books and furniture
soothes her. This is a fact. It is the end of her girlhood. Her last
words to me were, ‘A beautiful ending.’”

“She values the old furniture for sentimental reasons, in fact.”

“Exactly. You have quite understood. It is her last hope of being with
it.”

“I don’t agree there, my dear! Helen will have her share of the goods
wherever she goes--possibly more than her share, for you are so fond
of her that you’d give her anything of yours that she fancies, wouldn’t
you? and I’d raise no objection. I could understand it if it was her old
home, because a home, or a house,” he changed the word, designedly; he
had thought of a telling point--“because a house in which one has once
lived becomes in a sort of way sacred, I don’t know why. Associations
and so on. Now Helen has no associations with Howards End, though I
and Charles and Evie have. I do not see why she wants to stay the night
there. She will only catch cold.”

“Leave it that you don’t see,” cried Margaret. “Call it fancy. But
realise that fancy is a scientific fact. Helen is fanciful, and wants
to.”

Then he surprised her--a rare occurrence. He shot an unexpected bolt.
“If she wants to sleep one night she may want to sleep two. We shall
never get her out of the house, perhaps.”

“Well?” said Margaret, with the precipice in sight. “And suppose we
don’t get her out of the house? Would it matter? She would do no one any
harm.”

Again the irritated gesture.

“No, Henry,” she panted, receding. “I didn’t mean that. We will
only trouble Howards End for this one night. I take her to London
to-morrow--”

“Do you intend to sleep in a damp house, too?”

“She cannot be left alone.”

“That’s quite impossible! Madness. You must be here to meet Charles.”

“I have already told you that your message to Charles was unnecessary,
and I have no desire to meet him.”

“Margaret--my Margaret.”

“What has this business to do with Charles? If it concerns me little, it
concerns you less, and Charles not at all.”

“As the future owner of Howards End,” said Mr. Wilcox arching his
fingers, “I should say that it did concern Charles.”

“In what way? Will Helen’s condition depreciate the property?”

“My dear, you are forgetting yourself.”

“I think you yourself recommended plain speaking.”

They looked at each other in amazement. The precipice was at their feet
now.

“Helen commands my sympathy,” said Henry. “As your husband, I shall do
all for her that I can, and I have no doubt that she will prove more
sinned against than sinning. But I cannot treat her as if nothing has
happened. I should be false to my position in society if I did.”

She controlled herself for the last time. “No, let us go back to Helen’s
request,” she said. “It is unreasonable, but the request of an unhappy
girl. Tomorrow she will go to Germany, and trouble society no longer.
To-night she asks to sleep in your empty house--a house which you do not
care about, and which you have not occupied for over a year. May she?
Will you give my sister leave? Will you forgive her as you hope to be
forgiven, and as you have actually been forgiven? Forgive her for one
night only. That will be enough.”

“As I have actually been forgiven--?”

“Never mind for the moment what I mean by that,” said Margaret. “Answer
my question.”

Perhaps some hint of her meaning did dawn on him. If so, he blotted
it out. Straight from his fortress he answered: “I seem rather
unaccommodating, but I have some experience of life, and know how one
thing leads to another. I am afraid that your sister had better sleep
at the hotel. I have my children and the memory of my dear wife to
consider. I am sorry, but see that she leaves my house at once.”

“You have mentioned Mrs. Wilcox.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“A rare occurrence. In reply, may I mention Mrs. Bast?”

“You have not been yourself all day,” said Henry, and rose from his seat
with face unmoved. Margaret rushed at him and seized both his hands. She
was transfigured.

“Not any more of this!” she cried. “You shall see the connection if it
kills you, Henry! You have had a mistress--I forgave you. My sister
has a lover--you drive her from the house. Do you see the connection?
Stupid, hypocritical, cruel--oh, contemptible!--a man who insults his
wife when she’s alive and cants with her memory when she’s dead. A man
who ruins a woman for his pleasure, and casts her off to ruin other men.
And gives bad financial advice, and then says he is not responsible.
These men are you. You can’t recognise them, because you cannot connect.
I’ve had enough of your unneeded kindness. I’ve spoilt you long enough.
All your life you have been spoiled. Mrs. Wilcox spoiled you. No one has
ever told what you are--muddled, criminally muddled. Men like you use
repentance as a blind, so don’t repent. Only say to yourself, ‘What
Helen has done, I’ve done.’”

“The two cases are different,” Henry stammered. His real retort was
not quite ready. His brain was still in a whirl, and he wanted a little
longer.

“In what way different? You have betrayed Mrs. Wilcox, Helen only
herself. You remain in society, Helen can’t. You have had only pleasure,
she may die. You have the insolence to talk to me of differences,
Henry?”

Oh, the uselessness of it! Henry’s retort came.

“I perceive you are attempting blackmail. It is scarcely a pretty weapon
for a wife to use against her husband. My rule through life has been
never to pay the least attention to threats, and I can only repeat
what I said before: I do not give you and your sister leave to sleep at
Howards End.”

Margaret loosed his hands. He went into the house, wiping first one and
then the other on his handkerchief. For a little she stood looking at
the Six Hills, tombs of warriors, breasts of the spring. Then she passed
out into what was now the evening.



CHAPTER XXXIX

Charles and Tibby met at Ducie Street, where the latter was staying.
Their interview was short and absurd. They had nothing in common but the
English language, and tried by its help to express what neither of them
understood. Charles saw in Helen the family foe. He had singled her out
as the most dangerous of the Schlegels, and, angry as he was, looked
forward to telling his wife how right he had been. His mind was made up
at once; the girl must be got out of the way before she disgraced them
farther. If occasion offered she might be married to a villain, or,
possibly, to a fool. But this was a concession to morality, it formed
no part of his main scheme. Honest and hearty was Charles’s dislike, and
the past spread itself out very clearly before him; hatred is a skilful
compositor. As if they were heads in a note-book, he ran through all
the incidents of the Schlegels’ campaign: the attempt to compromise his
brother, his mother’s legacy, his father’s marriage, the introduction
of the furniture, the unpacking of the same. He had not yet heard of the
request to sleep at Howards End; that was to be their master-stroke and
the opportunity for his. But he already felt that Howards End was the
objective, and, though he disliked the house, was determined to defend
it.

Tibby, on the other hand, had no opinions. He stood above the
conventions: his sister had a right to do what she thought right. It is
not difficult to stand above the conventions when we leave no hostages
among them; men can always be more unconventional than women, and a
bachelor of independent means need encounter no difficulties at all.
Unlike Charles, Tibby had money enough; his ancestors had earned it for
him, and if he shocked the people in one set of lodgings he had only to
move into another. His was the leisure without sympathy--an attitude as
fatal as the strenuous; a little cold culture may be raised on it, but
no art. His sisters had seen the family danger, and had never forgotten
to discount the gold islets that raised them from the sea. Tibby gave
all the praise to himself, and so despised the struggling and the
submerged.

Hence the absurdity of the interview; the gulf between them was economic
as well as spiritual. But several facts passed; Charles pressed for them
with an impertinence that the undergraduate could not withstand. On what
date had Helen gone abroad? To whom? (Charles was anxious to fasten the
scandal on Germany.) Then, changing his tactics, he said roughly: “I
suppose you realise that you are your sister’s protector?”

“In what sense?”

“If a man played about with my sister, I’d send a bullet through him,
but perhaps you don’t mind.”

“I mind very much,” protested Tibby.

“Who d’ye suspect, then? Speak out man. One always suspects some one.”

“No one. I don’t think so.” Involuntarily he blushed. He had remembered
the scene in his Oxford rooms.

“You are hiding something,” said Charles. As interviews go, he got the
best of this one. “When you saw her last, did she mention any one’s
name? Yes or no!” he thundered, so that Tibby started.

“In my rooms she mentioned some friends, called the Basts.”

“Who are the Basts?”

“People--friends of hers at Evie’s wedding.”

“I don’t remember. But, by great Scott, I do! My aunt told me about some
rag-tag. Was she full of them when you saw her? Is there a man? Did she
speak of the man? Or--look here--have you had any dealings with him?”

Tibby was silent. Without intending it, he had betrayed his sister’s
confidence; he was not enough interested in human life to see where
things will lead to. He had a strong regard for honesty, and his word,
once given, had always been kept up to now. He was deeply vexed, not
only for the harm he had done Helen, but for the flaw he had discovered
in his own equipment.

“I see--you are in his confidence. They met at your rooms. Oh, what a
family, what a family! God help the poor pater--”

And Tibby found himself alone.



CHAPTER XL

Leonard--he would figure at length in a newspaper report, but that
evening he did not count for much. The foot of the tree was in shadow,
since the moon was still hidden behind the house. But above, to right,
to left, down the long meadow the moonlight was streaming. Leonard
seemed not a man, but a cause.

Perhaps it was Helen’s way of falling in love--a curious way to
Margaret, whose agony and whose contempt of Henry were yet imprinted
with his image. Helen forgot people. They were husks that had enclosed
her emotion. She could pity, or sacrifice herself, or have instincts,
but had she ever loved in the noblest way, where man and woman, having
lost themselves in sex, desire to lose sex itself in comradeship?

Margaret wondered, but said no word of blame. This was Helen’s evening.
Troubles enough lay ahead of her--the loss of friends and of social
advantages, the agony, the supreme agony, of motherhood, which is not
even yet a matter of common knowledge. For the present let the moon
shine brightly and the breezes of the spring blow gently, dying away
from the gale of the day, and let the earth, that brings increase, bring
peace. Not even to herself dare she blame Helen.

She could not assess her trespass by any moral code; it was everything
or nothing. Morality can tell us that murder is worse than stealing, and
group most sins in an order all must approve, but it cannot group Helen.
The surer its pronouncements on this point, the surer may we be that
morality is not speaking. Christ was evasive when they questioned Him.
It is those that cannot connect who hasten to cast the first stone.

This was Helen’s evening--won at what cost, and not to be marred by the
sorrows of others. Of her own tragedy Margaret never uttered a word.

“One isolates,” said Helen slowly. “I isolated Mr. Wilcox from the other
forces that were pulling Leonard downhill. Consequently, I was full of
pity, and almost of revenge. For weeks I had blamed Mr. Wilcox only, and
so, when your letters came--”

“I need never have written them,” sighed Margaret. “They never shielded
Henry. How hopeless it is to tidy away the past, even for others!”

“I did not know that it was your own idea to dismiss the Basts.”

“Looking back, that was wrong of me.”

“Looking back, darling, I know that it was right. It is right to save
the man whom one loves. I am less enthusiastic about justice now. But we
both thought you wrote at his dictation. It seemed the last touch of his
callousness. Being very much wrought up by this time--and Mrs. Bast
was upstairs. I had not seen her, and had talked for a long time to
Leonard--I had snubbed him for no reason, and that should have warned me
I was in danger. So when the notes came I wanted us to go to you for an
explanation. He said that he guessed the explanation--he knew of it, and
you mustn’t know. I pressed him to tell me. He said no one must know; it
was something to do with his wife. Right up to the end we were Mr. Bast
and Miss Schlegel. I was going to tell him that he must be frank with me
when I saw his eyes, and guessed that Mr. Wilcox had ruined him in two
ways, not one. I drew him to me. I made him tell me. I felt very lonely
myself. He is not to blame. He would have gone on worshipping me. I want
never to see him again, though it sounds appalling. I wanted to give him
money and feel finished. Oh, Meg, the little that is known about these
things!”

She laid her face against the tree.

“The little, too, that is known about growth! Both times it was
loneliness, and the night, and panic afterwards. Did Leonard grow out of
Paul?”

Margaret did not speak for a moment. So tired was she that her attention
had actually wandered to the teeth--the teeth that had been thrust into
the tree’s bark to medicate it. From where she sat she could see them
gleam. She had been trying to count them. “Leonard is a better growth
than madness,” she said. “I was afraid that you would react against Paul
until you went over the verge.”

“I did react until I found poor Leonard. I am steady now. I shan’t ever
like your Henry, dearest Meg, or even speak kindly about him, but all
that blinding hate is over. I shall never rave against Wilcoxes any
more. I understand how you married him, and you will now be very happy.”

Margaret did not reply.

“Yes,” repeated Helen, her voice growing more tender, “I do at last
understand.”

“Except Mrs. Wilcox, dearest, no one understands our little movements.”

“Because in death--I agree.”

“Not quite. I feel that you and I and Henry are only fragments of that
woman’s mind. She knows everything. She is everything. She is the house,
and the tree that leans over it. People have their own deaths as well
as their own lives, and even if there is nothing beyond death, we shall
differ in our nothingness. I cannot believe that knowledge such as hers
will perish with knowledge such as mine. She knew about realities. She
knew when people were in love, though she was not in the room. I don’t
doubt that she knew when Henry deceived her.”

“Good-night, Mrs. Wilcox,” called a voice.

“Oh, good-night, Miss Avery.”

“Why should Miss Avery work for us?” Helen murmured.

“Why, indeed?”

Miss Avery crossed the lawn and merged into the hedge that divided
it from the farm. An old gap, which Mr. Wilcox had filled up, had
reappeared, and her track through the dew followed the path that he had
turfed over, when he improved the garden and made it possible for games.

“This is not quite our house yet,” said Helen. “When Miss Avery called,
I felt we are only a couple of tourists.”

“We shall be that everywhere, and for ever.”

“But affectionate tourists.”

“But tourists who pretend each hotel is their home.”

“I can’t pretend very long,” said Helen. “Sitting under this tree one
forgets, but I know that to-morrow I shall see the moon rise out of
Germany. Not all your goodness can alter the facts of the case. Unless
you will come with me.”

Margaret thought for a moment. In the past year she had grown so fond
of England that to leave it was a real grief. Yet what detained her? No
doubt Henry would pardon her outburst, and go on blustering and muddling
into a ripe old age. But what was the good? She had just as soon vanish
from his mind.

“Are you serious in asking me, Helen? Should I get on with your Monica?”

“You would not, but I am serious in asking you.”

“Still, no more plans now. And no more reminiscences.”

They were silent for a little. It was Helen’s evening.

The present flowed by them like a stream. The tree rustled. It had made
music before they were born, and would continue after their deaths,
but its song was of the moment. The moment had passed. The tree rustled
again. Their senses were sharpened, and they seemed to apprehend life.
Life passed. The tree rustled again.

“Sleep now,” said Margaret.

The peace of the country was entering into her. It has no commerce with
memory, and little with hope. Least of all is it concerned with the
hopes of the next five minutes. It is the peace of the present, which
passes understanding. Its murmur came “now,” and “now” once more as they
trod the gravel, and “now,” as the moonlight fell upon their father’s
sword. They passed upstairs, kissed, and amidst the endless iterations
fell asleep. The house had enshadowed the tree at first, but as the moon
rose higher the two disentangled, and were clear for a few moments
at midnight. Margaret awoke and looked into the garden. How
incomprehensible that Leonard Bast should have won her this night of
peace! Was he also part of Mrs. Wilcox’s mind?



CHAPTER XLI

Far different was Leonard’s development. The months after Oniton,
whatever minor troubles they might bring him, were all overshadowed by
Remorse. When Helen looked back she could philosophise, or she could
look into the future and plan for her child. But the father saw nothing
beyond his own sin. Weeks afterwards, in the midst of other occupations,
he would suddenly cry out, “Brute--you brute, I couldn’t have--” and be
rent into two people who held dialogues. Or brown rain would descend,
blotting out faces and the sky. Even Jacky noticed the change in him.
Most terrible were his sufferings when he awoke from sleep. Sometimes
he was happy at first, but grew conscious of a burden hanging to him
and weighing down his thoughts when they would move. Or little irons
scorched his body. Or a sword stabbed him. He would sit at the edge of
his bed, holding his heart and moaning, “Oh what SHALL I do, whatever
SHALL I do?” Nothing brought ease. He could put distance between him and
the trespass, but it grew in his soul.

Remorse is not among the eternal verities. The Greeks were right to
dethrone her. Her action is too capricious, as though the Erinyes
selected for punishment only certain men and certain sins. And of all
means to regeneration Remorse is surely the most wasteful. It cuts away
healthy tissues with the poisoned. It is a knife that probes far deeper
than the evil. Leonard was driven straight through its torments and
emerged pure, but enfeebled--a better man, who would never lose control
of himself again, but also a smaller man, who had less to control. Nor
did purity mean peace. The use of the knife can become a habit as hard
to shake off as passion itself, and Leonard continued to start with a
cry out of dreams.

He built up a situation that was far enough from the truth. It never
occurred to him that Helen was to blame. He forgot the intensity of
their talk, the charm that had been lent him by sincerity, the magic
of Oniton under darkness and of the whispering river. Helen loved the
absolute. Leonard had been ruined absolutely, and had appeared to her
as a man apart, isolated from the world. A real man, who cared for
adventure and beauty, who desired to live decently and pay his way, who
could have travelled more gloriously through life than the juggernaut
car that was crushing him. Memories of Evie’s wedding had warped
her, the starched servants, the yards of uneaten food, the rustle of
overdressed women, motor-cars oozing grease on the gravel, a pretentious
band. She had tasted the lees of this on her arrival; in the darkness,
after failure, they intoxicated her. She and the victim seemed alone in
a world of unreality, and she loved him absolutely, perhaps for half an
hour.

In the morning she was gone. The note that she left, tender and
hysterical in tone, and intended to be most kind, hurt her lover
terribly. It was as if some work of art had been broken by him, some
picture in the National Gallery slashed out of its frame. When he
recalled her talents and her social position, he felt that the first
passer-by had a right to shoot him down. He was afraid of the waitress
and the porters at the railway-station. He was afraid at first of his
wife, though later he was to regard her with a strange new tenderness,
and to think, “There is nothing to choose between us, after all.”

The expedition to Shropshire crippled the Basts permanently. Helen
in her flight forgot to settle the hotel bill, and took their return
tickets away with her; they had to pawn Jacky’s bangles to get home, and
the smash came a few days afterwards. It is true that Helen offered him
five thousand pounds, but such a sum meant nothing to him. He could not
see that the girl was desperately righting herself, and trying to save
something out of the disaster, if it was only five thousand pounds. But
he had to live somehow. He turned to his family, and degraded himself to
a professional beggar. There was nothing else for him to do.

“A letter from Leonard,” thought Blanche, his sister; “and after all
this time.” She hid it, so that her husband should not see, and when he
had gone to his work read it with some emotion, and sent the prodigal a
little money out of her dress allowance.

“A letter from Leonard!” said the other sister, Laura, a few days later.
She showed it to her husband. He wrote a cruel, insolent reply, but sent
more money than Blanche, so Leonard soon wrote to him again.

And during the winter the system was developed.

Leonard realised that they need never starve, because it would be too
painful for his relatives. Society is based on the family, and the
clever wastrel can exploit this indefinitely. Without a generous thought
on either side, pounds and pounds passed. The donors disliked Leonard,
and he grew to hate them intensely. When Laura censured his immoral
marriage, he thought bitterly, “She minds that! What would she say if
she knew the truth?” When Blanche’s husband offered him work, he found
some pretext for avoiding it. He had wanted work keenly at Oniton, but
too much anxiety had shattered him, he was joining the unemployable.
When his brother, the lay-reader, did not reply to a letter, he wrote
again, saying that he and Jacky would come down to his village on foot.
He did not intend this as blackmail. Still the brother sent a postal
order, and it became part of the system. And so passed his winter and
his spring.

In the horror there are two bright spots. He never confused the past. He
remained alive, and blessed are those who live, if it is only to a sense
of sinfulness. The anodyne of muddledom, by which most men blur and
blend their mistakes, never passed Leonard’s lips--

        “And if I drink oblivion of a day,
         So shorten I the stature of my soul.”

It is a hard saying, and a hard man wrote it, but it lies at the root of
all character.

And the other bright spot was his tenderness for Jacky. He pitied her
with nobility now--not the contemptuous pity of a man who sticks to a
woman through thick and thin. He tried to be less irritable. He wondered
what her hungry eyes desired--nothing that she could express, or that
he or any man could give her. Would she ever receive the justice that is
mercy--the justice for by-products that the world is too busy to bestow?
She was fond of flowers, generous with money, and not revengeful. If she
had borne him a child he might have cared for her. Unmarried, Leonard
would never have begged; he would have flickered out and died. But the
whole of life is mixed. He had to provide for Jacky, and went down dirty
paths that she might have a few feathers and the dishes of food that
suited her.

One day he caught sight of Margaret and her brother. He was in St.
Paul’s. He had entered the cathedral partly to avoid the rain and partly
to see a picture that had educated him in former years. But the light
was bad, the picture ill placed, and Time and judgment were inside him
now. Death alone still charmed him, with her lap of poppies, on which
all men shall sleep. He took one glance, and turned aimlessly away
towards a chair. Then down the nave he saw Miss Schlegel and her
brother. They stood in the fairway of passengers, and their faces were
extremely grave. He was perfectly certain that they were in trouble
about their sister.

Once outside--and he fled immediately--he wished that he had spoken
to them. What was his life? What were a few angry words, or even
imprisonment? He had done wrong--that was the true terror. Whatever they
might know, he would tell them everything he knew. He re-entered St.
Paul’s. But they had moved in his absence, and had gone to lay their
difficulties before Mr. Wilcox and Charles.

The sight of Margaret turned remorse into new channels. He desired to
confess, and though the desire is proof of a weakened nature, which
is about to lose the essence of human intercourse, it did not take
an ignoble form. He did not suppose that confession would bring him
happiness. It was rather that he yearned to get clear of the tangle. So
does the suicide yearn. The impulses are akin, and the crime of suicide
lies rather in its disregard for the feelings of those whom we leave
behind. Confession need harm no one--it can satisfy that test--and
though it was un-English, and ignored by our Anglican cathedral, Leonard
had a right to decide upon it.

Moreover, he trusted Margaret. He wanted her hardness now. That cold,
intellectual nature of hers would be just, if unkind. He would do
whatever she told him, even if he had to see Helen. That was the supreme
punishment she would exact. And perhaps she would tell him how Helen
was. That was the supreme reward.

He knew nothing about Margaret, not even whether she was married to Mr.
Wilcox, and tracking her out took several days. That evening he
toiled through the wet to Wickham Place, where the new flats were now
appearing. Was he also the cause of their move? Were they expelled from
society on his account? Thence to a public library, but could find no
satisfactory Schlegel in the directory. On the morrow he searched again.
He hung about outside Mr. Wilcox’s office at lunch time, and, as the
clerks came out said, “Excuse me, sir, but is your boss married?” Most
of them stared, some said, “What’s that to you?” but one, who had not
yet acquired reticence, told him what he wished. Leonard could not learn
the private address. That necessitated more trouble with directories
and tubes. Ducie Street was not discovered till the Monday, the day
that Margaret and her husband went down on their hunting expedition to
Howards End.

He called at about four o’clock. The weather had changed, and the
sun shone gaily on the ornamental steps--black and white marble in
triangles. Leonard lowered his eyes to them after ringing the bell. He
felt in curious health; doors seemed to be opening and shutting inside
his body, and he had been obliged to sleep sitting up in bed, with his
back propped against the wall. When the parlourmaid came he could not
see her face; the brown rain had descended suddenly.

“Does Mrs. Wilcox live here?” he asked.

“She’s out,” was the answer.

“When will she be back?”

“I’ll ask,” said the parlourmaid.

Margaret had given instructions that no one who mentioned her name
should ever be rebuffed. Putting the door on the chain--for Leonard’s
appearance demanded this--she went through to the smoking-room, which
was occupied by Tibby. Tibby was asleep. He had had a good lunch.
Charles Wilcox had not yet rung him up for the distracting interview. He
said drowsily: “I don’t know. Hilton. Howards End. Who is it?”

“I’ll ask, sir.”

“No, don’t bother.”

“They have taken the car to Howards End,” said the parlourmaid to
Leonard.

He thanked her, and asked whereabouts that place was.

“You appear to want to know a good deal,” she remarked. But Margaret had
forbidden her to be mysterious. She told him against her better judgment
that Howards End was in Hertfordshire.

“Is it a village, please?”

“Village! It’s Mr. Wilcox’s private house--at least, it’s one of them.
Mrs. Wilcox keeps her furniture there. Hilton is the village.”

“Yes. And when will they be back?”

“Mr. Schlegel doesn’t know. We can’t know everything, can we?” She
shut him out, and went to attend to the telephone, which was ringing
furiously.

He loitered away another night of agony. Confession grew more difficult.
As soon as possible he went to bed. He watched a patch of moonlight
cross the floor of their lodging, and, as sometimes happens when the
mind is overtaxed, he fell asleep for the rest of the room, but kept
awake for the patch of moonlight. Horrible! Then began one of those
disintegrating dialogues. Part of him said: “Why horrible? It’s ordinary
light from the moon.” “But it moves.” “So does the moon.” “But it is a
clenched fist.” “Why not?” “But it is going to touch me.” “Let it.” And,
seeming to gather motion, the patch ran up his blanket. Presently a
blue snake appeared; then another parallel to it. “Is there life in the
moon?” “Of course.” “But I thought it was uninhabited.” “Not by Time,
Death, Judgment, and the smaller snakes.” “Smaller snakes!” said Leonard
indignantly and aloud. “What a notion!” By a rending effort of the
will he woke the rest of the room up. Jacky, the bed, their food, their
clothes on the chair, gradually entered his consciousness, and the
horror vanished outwards, like a ring that is spreading through water.

“I say, Jacky, I’m going out for a bit.”

She was breathing regularly. The patch of light fell clear of the
striped blanket, and began to cover the shawl that lay over her feet.
Why had he been afraid? He went to the window, and saw that the moon
was descending through a clear sky. He saw her volcanoes, and the bright
expanses that a gracious error has named seas. They paled, for the sun,
who had lit them up, was coming to light the earth. Sea of Serenity, Sea
of Tranquillity, Ocean of the Lunar Storms, merged into one lucent drop,
itself to slip into the sempiternal dawn. And he had been afraid of the
moon!

He dressed among the contending lights, and went through his money. It
was running low again, but enough for a return ticket to Hilton. As it
clinked, Jacky opened her eyes.

“Hullo, Len! What ho, Len!”

“What ho, Jacky! see you again later.”

She turned over and slept.

The house was unlocked, their landlord being a salesman at Covent
Garden. Leonard passed out and made his way down to the station. The
train, though it did not start for an hour, was already drawn up at the
end of the platform, and he lay down in it and slept. With the first
jolt he was in daylight; they had left the gateways of King’s Cross,
and were under blue sky. Tunnels followed, and after each the sky grew
bluer, and from the embankment at Finsbury Park he had his first sight
of the sun. It rolled along behind the eastern smokes--a wheel, whose
fellow was the descending moon--and as yet it seemed the servant of the
blue sky, not its lord. He dozed again. Over Tewin Water it was day. To
the left fell the shadow of the embankment and its arches; to the right
Leonard saw up into the Tewin Woods and towards the church, with its
wild legend of immortality. Six forest trees--that is a fact--grow out
of one of the graves in Tewin churchyard. The grave’s occupant--that is
the legend--is an atheist, who declared that if God existed, six forest
trees would grow out of her grave. These things in Hertfordshire; and
farther afield lay the house of a hermit--Mrs. Wilcox had known him--who
barred himself up, and wrote prophecies, and gave all he had to the
poor. While, powdered in between, were the villas of business men, who
saw life more steadily, though with the steadiness of the half-closed
eye. Over all the sun was streaming, to all the birds were singing, to
all the primroses were yellow, and the speedwell blue, and the country,
however they interpreted her, was uttering her cry of “now.” She did
not free Leonard yet, and the knife plunged deeper into his heart as the
train drew up at Hilton. But remorse had become beautiful.

Hilton was asleep, or at the earliest, breakfasting. Leonard noticed the
contrast when he stepped out of it into the country. Here men had been
up since dawn. Their hours were ruled, not by a London office, but by
the movements of the crops and the sun. That they were men of the finest
type only the sentimentalists can declare. But they kept to the life of
daylight. They are England’s hope. Clumsily they carry forward the torch
of the sun, until such time as the nation sees fit to take it up. Half
clodhopper, half board-school prig, they can still throw back to a
nobler stock, and breed yeomen.

At the chalk pit a motor passed him. In it was another type, whom Nature
favours--the Imperial. Healthy, ever in motion, it hopes to inherit the
earth. It breeds as quickly as the yeoman, and as soundly; strong is the
temptation to acclaim it as a super-yeoman, who carries his country’s
virtue overseas. But the Imperialist is not what he thinks or seems. He
is a destroyer. He prepares the way for cosmopolitanism, and though his
ambitions may be fulfilled, the earth that he inherits will be grey.

To Leonard, intent on his private sin, there came the conviction of
innate goodness elsewhere. It was not the optimism which he had been
taught at school. Again and again must the drums tap, and the goblins
stalk over the universe before joy can be purged of the superficial. It
was rather paradoxical, and arose from his sorrow. Death destroys a man,
but the idea of death saves him--that is the best account of it that has
yet been given. Squalor and tragedy can beckon to all that is great in
us, and strengthen the wings of love. They can beckon; it is not certain
that they will, for they are not love’s servants. But they can beckon,
and the knowledge of this incredible truth comforted him.

As he approached the house all thought stopped. Contradictory notions
stood side by side in his mind. He was terrified but happy, ashamed,
but had done no sin. He knew the confession: “Mrs. Wilcox, I have done
wrong,” but sunrise had robbed its meaning, and he felt rather on a
supreme adventure.

He entered a garden, steadied himself against a motor-car that he found
in it, found a door open and entered a house. Yes, it would be very
easy. From a room to the left he heard voices, Margaret’s amongst them.
His own name was called aloud, and a man whom he had never seen said,
“Oh, is he there? I am not surprised. I now thrash him within an inch of
his life.”

“Mrs. Wilcox,” said Leonard, “I have done wrong.”

The man took him by the collar and cried, “Bring me a stick.” Women were
screaming. A stick, very bright, descended. It hurt him, not where it
descended, but in the heart. Books fell over him in a shower. Nothing
had sense.

“Get some water,” commanded Charles, who had all through kept very calm.
“He’s shamming. Of course I only used the blade. Here, carry him out
into the air.”

Thinking that he understood these things, Margaret obeyed him. They laid
Leonard, who was dead, on the gravel; Helen poured water over him.

“That’s enough,” said Charles.

“Yes, murder’s enough,” said Miss Avery, coming out of the house with
the sword.



CHAPTER XLII

When Charles left Ducie Street he had caught the first train home, but
had no inkling of the newest development until late at night. Then
his father, who had dined alone, sent for him, and in very grave tones
inquired for Margaret.

“I don’t know where she is, pater” said Charles. “Dolly kept back dinner
nearly an hour for her.”

“Tell me when she comes in.”

Another hour passed. The servants went to bed, and Charles visited his
father again, to receive further instructions. Mrs. Wilcox had still not
returned.

“I’ll sit up for her as late as you like, but she can hardly be coming.
Isn’t she stopping with her sister at the hotel?”

“Perhaps,” said Mr. Wilcox thoughtfully--“perhaps.”

“Can I do anything for you, sir?”

“Not to-night, my boy.”

Mr. Wilcox liked being called sir. He raised his eyes, and gave his son
more open a look of tenderness than he usually ventured. He saw Charles
as little boy and strong man in one. Though his wife had proved unstable
his children were left to him.

After midnight he tapped on Charles’s door. “I can’t sleep,” he said. “I
had better have a talk with you and get it over.”

He complained of the heat. Charles took him out into the garden, and
they paced up and down in their dressing-gowns. Charles became very
quiet as the story unrolled; he had known all along that Margaret was as
bad as her sister.

“She will feel differently in the morning,” said Mr. Wilcox, who had
of course said nothing about Mrs. Bast. “But I cannot let this kind of
thing continue without comment. I am morally certain that she is with
her sister at Howards End. The house is mine--and, Charles, it will be
yours--and when I say that no one is to live there, I mean that no one
is to live there. I won’t have it.” He looked angrily at the moon.
“To my mind this question is connected with something far greater, the
rights of property itself.”

“Undoubtedly,” said Charles.

Mr. Wilcox linked his arm in his son’s, but somehow liked him less as
he told him more. “I don’t want you to conclude that my wife and I had
anything of the nature of a quarrel. She was only overwrought, as who
would not be? I shall do what I can for Helen, but on the understanding
that they clear out of the house at once. Do you see? That is a sine qua
non.”

“Then at eight to-morrow I may go up in the car?”

“Eight or earlier. Say that you are acting as my representative, and, of
course, use no violence, Charles.”

On the morrow, as Charles returned, leaving Leonard dead upon the
gravel, it did not seem to him that he had used violence. Death was
due to heart disease. His stepmother herself had said so, and even Miss
Avery had acknowledged that he only used the flat of the sword. On his
way through the village he informed the police, who thanked him, and
said there must be an inquest. He found his father in the garden shading
his eyes from the sun.

“It has been pretty horrible,” said Charles gravely. “They were there,
and they had the man up there with them too.”

“What--what man?”

“I told you last night. His name was Bast.”

“My God! is it possible?” said Mr. Wilcox. “In your mother’s house!
Charles, in your mother’s house!”

“I know, pater. That was what I felt. As a matter of fact, there is
no need to trouble about the man. He was in the last stages of heart
disease, and just before I could show him what I thought of him he went
off. The police are seeing about it at this moment.”

Mr. Wilcox listened attentively.

“I got up there--oh, it couldn’t have been more than half-past seven.
The Avery woman was lighting a fire for them. They were still upstairs.
I waited in the drawing-room. We were all moderately civil and
collected, though I had my suspicions. I gave them your message, and
Mrs. Wilcox said, ‘Oh yes, I see; yes,’ in that way of hers.”

“Nothing else?”

“I promised to tell you, ‘with her love,’ that she was going to Germany
with her sister this evening. That was all we had time for.”

Mr. Wilcox seemed relieved.

“Because by then I suppose the man got tired of hiding, for suddenly
Mrs. Wilcox screamed out his name. I recognised it, and I went for him
in the hall. Was I right, pater? I thought things were going a little
too far.”

“Right, my dear boy? I don’t know. But you would have been no son of
mine if you hadn’t. Then did he just--just--crumple up as you said?” He
shrunk from the simple word.

“He caught hold of the bookcase, which came down over him. So I merely
put the sword down and carried him into the garden. We all thought he
was shamming. However, he’s dead right enough. Awful business!”

“Sword?” cried his father, with anxiety in his voice. “What sword? Whose
sword?”

“A sword of theirs.”

“What were you doing with it?”

“Well, didn’t you see, pater, I had to snatch up the first thing handy.
I hadn’t a riding-whip or stick. I caught him once or twice over the
shoulders with the flat of their old German sword.”

“Then what?”

“He pulled over the bookcase, as I said, and fell,” said Charles, with
a sigh. It was no fun doing errands for his father, who was never quite
satisfied.

“But the real cause was heart disease? Of that you’re sure?”

“That or a fit. However, we shall hear more than enough at the inquest
on such unsavoury topics.”

They went in to breakfast. Charles had a racking headache, consequent on
motoring before food. He was also anxious about the future, reflecting
that the police must detain Helen and Margaret for the inquest and
ferret the whole thing out. He saw himself obliged to leave Hilton. One
could not afford to live near the scene of a scandal--it was not fair on
one’s wife. His comfort was that the pater’s eyes were opened at last.
There would be a horrible smash-up, and probably a separation from
Margaret; then they would all start again, more as they had been in his
mother’s time.

“I think I’ll go round to the police-station,” said his father when
breakfast was over.

“What for?” cried Dolly, who had still not been “told.”

“Very well, sir. Which car will you have?”

“I think I’ll walk.”

“It’s a good half-mile,” said Charles, stepping into the garden. “The
sun’s very hot for April. Shan’t I take you up, and then, perhaps, a
little spin round by Tewin?”

“You go on as if I didn’t know my own mind,” said Mr. Wilcox fretfully.
Charles hardened his mouth. “You young fellows’ one idea is to get into
a motor. I tell you, I want to walk; I’m very fond of walking.”

“Oh, all right; I’m about the house if you want me for anything. I
thought of not going up to the office to-day, if that is your wish.”

“It is, indeed, my boy,” said Mr. Wilcox, and laid a hand on his sleeve.

Charles did not like it; he was uneasy about his father, who did not
seem himself this morning. There was a petulant touch about him--more
like a woman. Could it be that he was growing old? The Wilcoxes were not
lacking in affection; they had it royally, but they did not know how to
use it. It was the talent in the napkin, and, for a warm-hearted man,
Charles had conveyed very little joy. As he watched his father shuffling
up the road, he had a vague regret--a wish that something had been
different somewhere--a wish (though he did not express it thus) that
he had been taught to say “I” in his youth. He meant to make up for
Margaret’s defection, but knew that his father had been very happy with
her until yesterday. How had she done it? By some dishonest trick, no
doubt--but how?

Mr. Wilcox reappeared at eleven, looking very tired. There was to be an
inquest on Leonard’s body to-morrow, and the police required his son to
attend.

“I expected that,” said Charles. “I shall naturally be the most
important witness there.”



CHAPTER XLIII

Out of the turmoil and horror that had begun with Aunt Juley’s illness
and was not even to end with Leonard’s death, it seemed impossible
to Margaret that healthy life should re-emerge. Events succeeded in
a logical, yet senseless, train. People lost their humanity, and took
values as arbitrary as those in a pack of playing-cards. It was natural
that Henry should do this and cause Helen to do that, and then think
her wrong for doing it; natural that she herself should think him wrong;
natural that Leonard should want to know how Helen was, and come, and
Charles be angry with him for coming--natural, but unreal. In this
jangle of causes and effects what had become of their true selves? Here
Leonard lay dead in the garden, from natural causes; yet life was a
deep, deep river, death a blue sky, life was a house, death a wisp of
hay, a flower, a tower, life and death were anything and everything,
except this ordered insanity, where the king takes the queen, and the
ace the king. Ah, no; there was beauty and adventure behind, such as the
man at her feet had yearned for; there was hope this side of the grave;
there were truer relationships beyond the limits that fetter us now. As
a prisoner looks up and sees stars beckoning, so she, from the turmoil
and horror of those days, caught glimpses of the diviner wheels.

And Helen, dumb with fright, but trying to keep calm for the child’s
sake, and Miss Avery, calm, but murmuring tenderly, “No one ever told
the lad he’ll have a child”--they also reminded her that horror is not
the end. To what ultimate harmony we tend she did not know, but there
seemed great chance that a child would be born into the world, to take
the great chances of beauty and adventure that the world offers. She
moved through the sunlit garden, gathering narcissi, crimson-eyed and
white. There was nothing else to be done; the time for telegrams and
anger was over and it seemed wisest that the hands of Leonard should be
folded on his breast and be filled with flowers. Here was the father;
leave it at that. Let Squalor be turned into Tragedy, whose eyes are the
stars, and whose hands hold the sunset and the dawn.

And even the influx of officials, even the return of the doctor, vulgar
and acute, could not shake her belief in the eternity of beauty. Science
explained people, but could not understand them. After long centuries
among the bones and muscles it might be advancing to knowledge of the
nerves, but this would never give understanding. One could open the
heart to Mr. Mansbridge and his sort without discovering its secrets to
them, for they wanted everything down in black and white, and black and
white was exactly what they were left with.

They questioned her closely about Charles. She never suspected why.
Death had come, and the doctor agreed that it was due to heart disease.
They asked to see her father’s sword. She explained that Charles’s anger
was natural, but mistaken. Miserable questions about Leonard followed,
all of which she answered unfalteringly. Then back to Charles again. “No
doubt Mr. Wilcox may have induced death,” she said; “but if it wasn’t
one thing it would have been another as you know.” At last they thanked
her and took the sword and the body down to Hilton. She began to pick up
the books from the floor.

Helen had gone to the farm. It was the best place for her, since she
had to wait for the inquest. Though, as if things were not hard enough,
Madge and her husband had raised trouble; they did not see why they
should receive the offscourings of Howards End. And, of course, they
were right. The whole world was going to be right, and amply avenge any
brave talk against the conventions. “Nothing matters,” the Schlegels had
said in the past, “except one’s self-respect and that of one’s friends.”
 When the time came, other things mattered terribly. However, Madge
had yielded, and Helen was assured of peace for one day and night, and
to-morrow she would return to Germany.

As for herself, she determined to go too. No message came from Henry;
perhaps he expected her to apologise. Now that she had time to think
over her own tragedy, she was unrepentant. She neither forgave him
for his behaviour nor wished to forgive him. Her speech to him seemed
perfect. She would not have altered a word. It had to be uttered once in
a life, to adjust the lopsidedness of the world. It was spoken not only
to her husband, but to thousands of men like him--a protest against the
inner darkness in high places that comes with a commercial age. Though
he would build up his life without hers, she could not apologise. He had
refused to connect, on the clearest issue that can be laid before a man,
and their love must take the consequences.

No, there was nothing more to be done. They had tried not to go over the
precipice, but perhaps the fall was inevitable. And it comforted her to
think that the future was certainly inevitable; cause and effect would
go jangling forward to some goal doubtless, but to none that she could
imagine. At such moments the soul retires within, to float upon the
bosom of a deeper stream, and has communion with the dead, and sees
the world’s glory not diminished, but different in kind to what she
has supposed. She alters her focus until trivial things are blurred.
Margaret had been tending this way all the winter. Leonard’s death
brought her to the goal. Alas! that Henry should fade away as reality
emerged, and only her love for him should remain clear, stamped with his
image like the cameos we rescue out of dreams.

With unfaltering eye she traced his future. He would soon present a
healthy mind to the world again, and what did he or the world care if
he was rotten at the core? He would grow into a rich, jolly old man,
at times a little sentimental about women, but emptying his glass
with anyone. Tenacious of power, he would keep Charles and the rest
dependent, and retire from business reluctantly and at an advanced age.
He would settle down--though she could not realise this. In her eyes
Henry was always moving and causing others to move, until the ends of
the earth met. But in time he must get too tired to move, and settle
down. What next? The inevitable word. The release of the soul to its
appropriate Heaven.

Would they meet in it? Margaret believed in immortality for herself. An
eternal future had always seemed natural to her. And Henry believed in
it for himself. Yet, would they meet again? Are there not rather endless
levels beyond the grave, as the theory that he had censured teaches?
And his level, whether higher or lower, could it possibly be the same as
hers?

Thus gravely meditating, she was summoned by him. He sent up Crane in
the motor. Other servants passed like water, but the chauffeur remained,
though impertinent and disloyal. Margaret disliked Crane, and he knew
it.

“Is it the keys that Mr. Wilcox wants?” she asked.

“He didn’t say, madam.”

“You haven’t any note for me?”

“He didn’t say, madam.”

After a moment’s thought she locked up Howards End. It was pitiable to
see in it the stirrings of warmth that would be quenched for ever. She
raked out the fire that was blazing in the kitchen, and spread the coals
in the gravelled yard. She closed the windows and drew the curtains.
Henry would probably sell the place now.

She was determined not to spare him, for nothing new had happened as far
as they were concerned. Her mood might never have altered from yesterday
evening. He was standing a little outside Charles’s gate, and motioned
the car to stop. When his wife got out he said hoarsely: “I prefer to
discuss things with you outside.”

“It will be more appropriate in the road, I am afraid,” said Margaret.
“Did you get my message?”

“What about?”

“I am going to Germany with my sister. I must tell you now that I shall
make it my permanent home. Our talk last night was more important than
you have realised. I am unable to forgive you and am leaving you.”

“I am extremely tired,” said Henry, in injured tones. “I have been
walking about all the morning, and wish to sit down.”

“Certainly, if you will consent to sit on the grass.”

The Great North Road should have been bordered all its length with
glebe. Henry’s kind had filched most of it. She moved to the scrap
opposite, wherein were the Six Hills. They sat down on the farther side,
so that they could not be seen by Charles or Dolly.

“Here are your keys,” said Margaret. She tossed them towards him. They
fell on the sunlit slope of grass, and he did not pick them up.

“I have something to tell you,” he said gently.

She knew this superficial gentleness, this confession of hastiness, that
was only intended to enhance her admiration of the male.

“I don’t want to hear it,” she replied. “My sister is going to be
ill. My life is going to be with her now. We must manage to build up
something, she and I and her child.”

“Where are you going?”

“Munich. We start after the inquest, if she is not too ill.”

“After the inquest?”

“Yes.”

“Have you realised what the verdict at the inquest will be?”

“Yes, heart disease.”

“No, my dear; manslaughter.”

Margaret drove her fingers through the grass. The hill beneath her moved
as if it were alive.

“Manslaughter,” repeated Mr. Wilcox. “Charles may go to prison. I dare
not tell him. I don’t know what to do--what to do. I’m broken--I’m
ended.”

No sudden warmth arose in her. She did not see that to break him was her
only hope. She did not enfold the sufferer in her arms. But all through
that day and the next a new life began to move. The verdict was brought
in. Charles was committed for trial. It was against all reason that he
should be punished, but the law, notwithstanding, sentenced him to three
years’ imprisonment. Then Henry’s fortress gave way. He could bear no
one but his wife; he shambled up to Margaret afterwards and asked her
to do what she could with him. She did what seemed easiest--she took him
down to recruit at Howards End.



CHAPTER XLIV

Tom’s father was cutting the big meadow. He passed again and again amid
whirring blades and sweet odours of grass, encompassing with narrowing
circles the sacred centre of the field. Tom was negotiating with Helen.
“I haven’t any idea,” she replied. “Do you suppose baby may, Meg?”

Margaret put down her work and regarded them absently. “What was that?”
 she asked.

“Tom wants to know whether baby is old enough to play with hay?”

“I haven’t the least notion,” answered Margaret, and took up her work
again.

“Now, Tom, baby is not to stand; he is not to lie on his face; he is not
to lie so that his head wags; he is not to be teased or tickled; and he
is not to be cut into two or more pieces by the cutter. Will you be as
careful as all that?”

Tom held out his arms.

“That child is a wonderful nursemaid,” remarked Margaret.

“He is fond of baby. That’s why he does it!” was Helen’s answer.
“They’re going to be lifelong friends.”

“Starting at the ages of six and one?”

“Of course. It will be a great thing for Tom.”

“It may be a greater thing for baby.”

Fourteen months had passed, but Margaret still stopped at Howards End.
No better plan had occurred to her. The meadow was being recut, the
great red poppies were reopening in the garden. July would follow with
the little red poppies among the wheat, August with the cutting of the
wheat. These little events would become part of her year after year.
Every summer she would fear lest the well should give out, every
winter lest the pipes should freeze; every westerly gale might blow the
wych-elm down and bring the end of all things, and so she could not read
or talk during a westerly gale. The air was tranquil now. She and her
sister were sitting on the remains of Evie’s rockery, where the lawn
merged into the field.

“What a time they all are!” said Helen. “What can they be doing inside?”
 Margaret, who was growing less talkative, made no answer. The noise of
the cutter came intermittently, like the breaking of waves. Close by
them a man was preparing to scythe out one of the dell-holes.

“I wish Henry was out to enjoy this,” said Helen. “This lovely weather
and to be shut up in the house! It’s very hard.”

“It has to be,” said Margaret. “The hay fever is his chief objection
against living here, but he thinks it worth while.”

“Meg, is or isn’t he ill? I can’t make out.”

“Not ill. Eternally tired. He has worked very hard all his life, and
noticed nothing. Those are the people who collapse when they do notice a
thing.”

“I suppose he worries dreadfully about his part of the tangle.”

“Dreadfully. That is why I wish Dolly had not come, too, to-day. Still,
he wanted them all to come. It has to be.”

“Why does he want them?”

Margaret did not answer.

“Meg, may I tell you something? I like Henry.”

“You’d be odd if you didn’t,” said Margaret.

“I usen’t to.”

“Usen’t!” She lowered her eyes a moment to the black abyss of the past.
They had crossed it, always excepting Leonard and Charles. They were
building up a new life, obscure, yet gilded with tranquillity. Leonard
was dead; Charles had two years more in prison. One usen’t always to see
clearly before that time. It was different now.

“I like Henry because he does worry.”

“And he likes you because you don’t.”

Helen sighed. She seemed humiliated, and buried her face in her hands.
After a time she said: “About love,” a transition less abrupt than it
appeared.

Margaret never stopped working.

“I mean a woman’s love for a man. I supposed I should hang my life on
to that once, and was driven up and down and about as if something was
worrying through me. But everything is peaceful now; I seem cured. That
Herr Forstmeister, whom Frieda keeps writing about, must be a noble
character, but he doesn’t see that I shall never marry him or anyone. It
isn’t shame or mistrust of myself. I simply couldn’t. I’m ended. I used
to be so dreamy about a man’s love as a girl, and think that for good
or evil love must be the great thing. But it hasn’t been; it has been
itself a dream. Do you agree?”

“I do not agree. I do not.”

“I ought to remember Leonard as my lover,” said Helen, stepping down
into the field. “I tempted him, and killed him, and it is surely the
least I can do. I would like to throw out all my heart to Leonard on
such an afternoon as this. But I cannot. It is no good pretending. I
am forgetting him.” Her eyes filled with tears. “How nothing seems to
match--how, my darling, my precious--” She broke off. “Tommy!”

“Yes, please?”

“Baby’s not to try and stand.--There’s something wanting in me. I see
you loving Henry, and understanding him better daily, and I know
that death wouldn’t part you in the least. But I--Is it some awful,
appalling, criminal defect?”

Margaret silenced her. She said: “It is only that people are far more
different than is pretended. All over the world men and women are
worrying because they cannot develop as they are supposed to develop.
Here and there they have the matter out, and it comforts them. Don’t
fret yourself, Helen. Develop what you have; love your child. I do not
love children. I am thankful to have none. I can play with their beauty
and charm, but that is all--nothing real, not one scrap of what there
ought to be. And others--others go farther still, and move outside
humanity altogether. A place, as well as a person, may catch the glow.
Don’t you see that all this leads to comfort in the end? It is part of
the battle against sameness. Differences, eternal differences, planted
by God in a single family, so that there may always be colour; sorrow
perhaps, but colour in the daily grey. Then I can’t have you worrying
about Leonard. Don’t drag in the personal when it will not come. Forget
him.”

“Yes, yes, but what has Leonard got out of life?”

“Perhaps an adventure.”

“Is that enough?”

“Not for us. But for him.”

Helen took up a bunch of grass. She looked at the sorrel, and the red
and white and yellow clover, and the quaker grass, and the daisies, and
the bents that composed it. She raised it to her face.

“Is it sweetening yet?” asked Margaret.

“No, only withered.”

“It will sweeten to-morrow.”

Helen smiled. “Oh, Meg, you are a person,” she said. “Think of the
racket and torture this time last year. But now I couldn’t stop unhappy
if I tried. What a change--and all through you!”

“Oh, we merely settled down. You and Henry learnt to understand one
another and to forgive, all through the autumn and the winter.”

“Yes, but who settled us down?”

Margaret did not reply. The scything had begun, and she took off her
pince-nez to watch it.

“You!” cried Helen. “You did it all, sweetest, though you’re too stupid
to see. Living here was your plan--I wanted you; he wanted you; and
everyone said it was impossible, but you knew. Just think of our lives
without you, Meg--I and baby with Monica, revolting by theory, he handed
about from Dolly to Evie. But you picked up the pieces, and made us a
home. Can’t it strike you--even for a moment--that your life has been
heroic? Can’t you remember the two months after Charles’s arrest, when
you began to act, and did all?”

“You were both ill at the time,” said Margaret. “I did the obvious
things. I had two invalids to nurse. Here was a house, ready furnished
and empty. It was obvious. I didn’t know myself it would turn into a
permanent home. No doubt I have done a little towards straightening the
tangle, but things that I can’t phrase have helped me.”

“I hope it will be permanent,” said Helen, drifting away to other
thoughts.

“I think so. There are moments when I feel Howards End peculiarly our
own.”

“All the same, London’s creeping.”

She pointed over the meadow--over eight or nine meadows, but at the end
of them was a red rust.

“You see that in Surrey and even Hampshire now,” she continued. “I can
see it from the Purbeck Downs. And London is only part of something
else, I’m afraid. Life’s going to be melted down, all over the world.”

Margaret knew that her sister spoke truly. Howards End, Oniton, the
Purbeck Downs, the Oderberge, were all survivals, and the melting-pot
was being prepared for them. Logically, they had no right to be alive.
One’s hope was in the weakness of logic. Were they possibly the earth
beating time?

“Because a thing is going strong now, it need not go strong for ever,”
 she said. “This craze for motion has only set in during the last hundred
years. It may be followed by a civilisation that won’t be a movement,
because it will rest on the earth. All the signs are against it now, but
I can’t help hoping, and very early in the morning in the garden I feel
that our house is the future as well as the past.”

They turned and looked at it. Their own memories coloured it now,
for Helen’s child had been born in the central room of the nine. Then
Margaret said, “Oh, take care--!” for something moved behind the window
of the hall, and the door opened.

“The conclave’s breaking at last. I’ll go.”

It was Paul.

Helen retreated with the children far into the field. Friendly voices
greeted her. Margaret rose, to encounter a man with a heavy black
moustache.

“My father has asked for you,” he said with hostility.

She took her work and followed him.

“We have been talking business,” he continued, “but I dare say you knew
all about it beforehand.”

“Yes, I did.”

Clumsy of movement--for he had spent all his life in the saddle--Paul
drove his foot against the paint of the front door. Mrs. Wilcox gave
a little cry of annoyance. She did not like anything scratched; she
stopped in the hall to take Dolly’s boa and gloves out of a vase.

Her husband was lying in a great leather chair in the dining-room, and
by his side, holding his hand rather ostentatiously, was Evie. Dolly,
dressed in purple, sat near the window. The room was a little dark and
airless; they were obliged to keep it like this until the carting of the
hay. Margaret joined the family without speaking; the five of them had
met already at tea, and she knew quite well what was going to be said.
Averse to wasting her time, she went on sewing. The clock struck six.

“Is this going to suit everyone?” said Henry in a weary voice. He used
the old phrases, but their effect was unexpected and shadowy. “Because I
don’t want you all coming here later on and complaining that I have been
unfair.”

“It’s apparently got to suit us,” said Paul.

“I beg your pardon, my boy. You have only to speak, and I will leave the
house to you instead.”

Paul frowned ill-temperedly, and began scratching at his arm. “As I’ve
given up the outdoor life that suited me, and I have come home to look
after the business, it’s no good my settling down here,” he said at
last. “It’s not really the country, and it’s not the town.”

“Very well. Does my arrangement suit you, Evie?”

“Of course, father.”

“And you, Dolly?”

Dolly raised her faded little face, which sorrow could wither but not
steady. “Perfectly splendidly,” she said. “I thought Charles wanted
it for the boys, but last time I saw him he said no, because we cannot
possibly live in this part of England again. Charles says we ought
to change our name, but I cannot think what to, for Wilcox just suits
Charles and me, and I can’t think of any other name.”

There was a general silence. Dolly looked nervously round, fearing that
she had been inappropriate. Paul continued to scratch his arm.

“Then I leave Howards End to my wife absolutely,” said Henry. “And let
everyone understand that; and after I am dead let there be no jealousy
and no surprise.”

Margaret did not answer. There was something uncanny in her triumph.
She, who had never expected to conquer anyone, had charged straight
through these Wilcoxes and broken up their lives.

“In consequence, I leave my wife no money,” said Henry. “That is her own
wish. All that she would have had will be divided among you. I am also
giving you a great deal in my lifetime, so that you may be independent
of me. That is her wish, too. She also is giving away a great deal of
money. She intends to diminish her income by half during the next ten
years; she intends when she dies to leave the house to her nephew, down
in the field. Is all that clear? Does everyone understand?”

Paul rose to his feet. He was accustomed to natives, and a very little
shook him out of the Englishman. Feeling manly and cynical, he said:
“Down in the field? Oh, come! I think we might have had the whole
establishment, piccaninnies included.”

Mrs. Cahill whispered: “Don’t, Paul. You promised you’d take care.”
 Feeling a woman of the world, she rose and prepared to take her leave.

Her father kissed her. “Good-bye, old girl,” he said; “don’t you worry
about me.”

“Good-bye, dad.”

Then it was Dolly’s turn. Anxious to contribute, she laughed nervously,
and said: “Good-bye, Mr. Wilcox. It does seem curious that Mrs. Wilcox
should have left Margaret Howards End, and yet she get it, after all.”

From Evie came a sharply-drawn breath. “Goodbye,” she said to Margaret,
and kissed her.

And again and again fell the word, like the ebb of a dying sea.

“Good-bye.”

“Good-bye, Dolly.”

“So long, father.”

“Good-bye, my boy; always take care of yourself.”

“Good-bye, Mrs. Wilcox.”

“Good-bye.”
Eustace's career--if career it can be called--certainly dates from that
afternoon in the chestnut woods above Ravello. I confess at once that I
am a plain, simple man, with no pretensions to literary style. Still, I
do flatter myself that I can tell a story without exaggerating, and I
have therefore decided to give an unbiassed account of the extraordinary
events of eight years ago.

Ravello is a delightful place with a delightful little hotel in which we
met some charming people. There were the two Miss Robinsons, who had
been there for six weeks with Eustace, their nephew, then a boy of about
fourteen. Mr. Sandbach had also been there some time. He had held a
curacy in the north of England, which he had been compelled to resign on
account of ill-health, and while he was recruiting at Ravello he had
taken in hand Eustace's education--which was then sadly deficient--and
was endeavouring to fit him for one of our great public schools. Then
there was Mr. Leyland, a would-be artist, and, finally, there was the
nice landlady, Signora Scafetti, and the nice English-speaking waiter,
Emmanuele--though at the time of which I am speaking Emmanuele was away,
visiting a sick father.

To this little circle, I, my wife, and my two daughters made, I venture
to think, a not unwelcome addition. But though I liked most of the
company well enough, there were two of them to whom I did not take at
all. They were the artist, Leyland, and the Miss Robinsons' nephew,
Eustace.

Leyland was simply conceited and odious, and, as those qualities will be
amply illustrated in my narrative, I need not enlarge upon them here.
But Eustace was something besides: he was indescribably repellent.

I am fond of boys as a rule, and was quite disposed to be friendly. I
and my daughters offered to take him out--'No, walking was such a fag.'
Then I asked him to come and bathe--' No, he could not swim.'

"Every English boy should be able to swim," I said, "I will teach you
myself."

"There, Eustace dear," said Miss Robinson; "here is a chance for you."

But he said he was afraid of the water!--a boy afraid!--and of course I
said no more.

I would not have minded so much if he had been a really studious boy,
but he neither played hard nor worked hard. His favourite occupations
were lounging on the terrace in an easy chair and loafing along the high
road, with his feet shuffling up the dust and his shoulders stooping
forward. Naturally enough, his features were pale, his chest contracted,
and his muscles undeveloped. His aunts thought him delicate; what he
really needed was discipline.

That memorable day we all arranged to go for a picnic up in the chestnut
woods--all, that is, except Janet, who stopped behind to finish her
water-colour of the Cathedral--not a very successful attempt, I am
afraid.

I wander off into these irrelevant details, because in my mind I cannot
separate them from an account of the day; and it is the same with the
conversation during the picnic: all is imprinted on my brain together.
After a couple of hours' ascent, we left the donkeys that had carried
the Miss Robinsons and my wife, and all proceeded on foot to the head of
the valley--Vallone Fontana Caroso is its proper name, I find.

I have visited a good deal of fine scenery before and since, but have
found little that has pleased me more. The valley ended in a vast
hollow, shaped like a cup, into which radiated ravines from the
precipitous hills around. Both the valley and the ravines and the ribs
of hill that divided the ravines were covered with leafy chestnut, so
that the general appearance was that of a many fingered green hand, palm
upwards, which was clutching, convulsively to keep us in its grasp. Far
down the valley we could see Ravello and the sea, but that was the only
sign of another world.

"Oh, what a perfectly lovely place," said my daughter Rose. "What a
picture it would make!"

"Yes," said Mr. Sandbach. "Many a famous European gallery would be proud
to have a landscape a tithe as beautiful as this upon its walls."

"On the contrary," said Leyland, "it would make a very poor picture.
Indeed, it is not paintable at all."

"And why is that?" said Rose, with far more deference than he deserved.

"Look, in the first place," he replied, "how intolerably straight
against the sky is the line of the hill. It would need breaking up and
diversifying. And where we are standing the whole thing is out of
perspective. Besides, all the colouring is monotonous and crude."

"I do not know anything about pictures," I put in, "and I do not pretend
to know: but I know what is beautiful when I see it, and I am thoroughly
content with this."

"Indeed, who could help being contented!" said the elder Miss Robinson
and Mr. Sandbach said the same.

"Ah!" said Leyland, "you all confuse the artistic view of nature with
the photographic."

Poor Rose had brought her camera with her, so I thought this positively
rude. I did not wish any unpleasantness; so I merely turned away and
assisted my wife and Miss Mary Robinson to put out the lunch--not a very
nice lunch.

"Eustace, dear," said his aunt, "come and help us here."

He was in a particularly bad temper that morning. He had, as usual, not
wanted to come, and his aunts had nearly allowed him to stop at the
hotel to vex Janet. But I, with their permission, spoke to him rather
sharply on the subject of exercise; and the result was that he had come,
but was even more taciturn and moody than usual.

Obedience was not his strong point. He invariably questioned every
command, and only executed it grumbling. I should always insist on
prompt and cheerful obedience, if I had a son.

"I'm--coming--Aunt--Mary," he at last replied, and dawdled to cut a
piece of wood to make a whistle, taking care not to arrive till we had
finished.

"Well, well, sir!" said I, "you stroll in at the end and profit by our
labours." He sighed, for he could not endure being chaffed. Miss Mary,
very unwisely, insisted on giving him the wing of the chicken, in spite
of all my attempts to prevent her. I remember that I had a moment's
vexation when I thought that, instead of enjoying the sun, and the air,
and the woods, we were all engaged in wrangling over the diet of a
spoilt boy.

But, after lunch, he was a little less in evidence. He withdrew to a
tree trunk, and began to loosen the bark from his whistle. I was
thankful to see him employed, for once in a way. We reclined, and took a
_dolce far niente_.

Those sweet chestnuts of the South are puny striplings compared with our
robust Northerners. But they clothed the contours of the hills and
valleys in a most pleasing way, their veil being only broken by two
clearings, in one of which we were sitting.

And because these few trees were cut down, Leyland burst into a petty
indictment of the proprietor.

"All the poetry is going from Nature," he cried, "her lakes and marshes
are drained, her seas banked up, her forests cut down. Everywhere we see
the vulgarity of desolation spreading."

I have had some experience of estates, and answered that cutting was
very necessary for the health of the larger trees. Besides, it was
unreasonable to expect the proprietor to derive no income from his
lands.

"If you take the commercial side of landscape, you may feel pleasure in
the owner's activity. But to me the mere thought that a tree is
convertible into cash is disgusting."

"I see no reason," I observed politely, "to despise the gifts of Nature,
because they are of value."

It did not stop him. "It is no matter," he went on, "we are all
hopelessly steeped in vulgarity. I do not except myself. It is through
us, and to our shame, that the Nereids have left the waters and the
Oreads the mountains, that the woods no longer give shelter to Pan."

"Pan!" cried Mr. Sandbach, his mellow voice filling the valley as if it
had been a great green church, "Pan is dead. That is why the woods do
not shelter him." And he began to tell the striking story of the
mariners who were sailing near the coast at the time of the birth of
Christ, and three times heard a loud voice saying: "The great God Pan is
dead."

"Yes. The great God Pan is dead," said Leyland. And he abandoned himself
to that mock misery in which artistic people are so fond of indulging.
His cigar went out, and he had to ask me for a match.

"How very interesting," said Rose. "I do wish I knew some ancient
history."

"It is not worth your notice," said Mr. Sandbach. "Eh, Eustace?"

Eustace was finishing his whistle. He looked up, with the irritable
frown in which his aunts allowed him to indulge, and made no reply.

The conversation turned to various topics and then died out. It was a
cloudless afternoon in May, and the pale green of the young chestnut
leaves made a pretty contrast with the dark blue of the sky. We were all
sitting at the edge of the small clearing for the sake of the view, and
the shade of the chestnut saplings behind us was manifestly
insufficient. All sounds died away--at least that is my account: Miss
Robinson says that the clamour of the birds was the first sign of
uneasiness that she discerned. All sounds died away, except that, far in
the distance, I could hear two boughs of a great chestnut grinding
together as the tree swayed. The grinds grew shorter and shorter, and
finally that sound stopped also. As I looked over the green fingers of
the valley, everything was absolutely motionless and still; and that
feeling of suspense which one so often experiences when Nature is in
repose, began to steal over me.

Suddenly, we were all electrified by the excruciating noise of Eustace's
whistle. I never heard any instrument give forth so ear-splitting and
discordant a sound.

"Eustace, dear," said Miss Mary Robinson, "you might have thought of
your poor Aunt Julia's head."

Leyland who had apparently been asleep, sat up.

"It is astonishing how blind a boy is to anything that is elevating or
beautiful," he observed. "I should not have thought he could have found
the wherewithal out here to spoil our pleasure like this."

Then the terrible silence fell upon us again. I was now standing up and
watching a catspaw of wind that was running down one of the ridges
opposite, turning the light green to dark as it travelled. A fanciful
feeling of foreboding came over me; so I turned away, to find to my
amazement, that all the others were also on their feet, watching it too.

It is not possible to describe coherently what happened next: but I, for
one, am not ashamed to confess that, though the fair blue sky was above
me, and the green spring woods beneath me, and the kindest of friends
around me, yet I became terribly frightened, more frightened than I ever
wish to become again, frightened in a way I never have known either
before or after. And in the eyes of the others, too, I saw blank,
expressionless fear, while their mouths strove in vain to speak and
their hands to gesticulate. Yet, all around us were prosperity, beauty,
and peace, and all was motionless, save the catspaw of wind, now
travelling up the ridge on which we stood.

Who moved first has never been settled. It is enough to say that in one
second we were tearing away along the hillside. Leyland was in front,
then Mr. Sandbach, then my wife. But I only saw for a brief moment; for
I ran across the little clearing and through the woods and over the
undergrowth and the rocks and down the dry torrent beds into the valley
below. The sky might have been black as I ran, and the trees short
grass, and the hillside a level road; for I saw nothing and heard
nothing and felt nothing, since all the channels of sense and reason
were blocked. It was not the spiritual fear that one has known at other
times, but brutal overmastering physical fear, stopping up the ears, and
dropping clouds before the eyes, and filling the mouth with foul tastes.
And it was no ordinary humiliation that survived; for I had been afraid,
not as a man, but as a beast.



II


I cannot describe our finish any better than our start; for our fear
passed away as it had come, without cause. Suddenly I was able to see,
and hear, and cough, and clear my mouth. Looking back, I saw that the
others were stopping too; and, in a short time, we were all together,
though it was long before we could speak, and longer before we dared to.

No one was seriously injured. My poor wife had sprained her ankle,
Leyland had torn one of his nails on a tree trunk, and I myself had
scraped and damaged my ear. I never noticed it till I had stopped.

We were all silent, searching one another's faces. Suddenly Miss Mary
Robinson gave a terrible shriek. "Oh, merciful heavens! where is
Eustace?" And then she would have fallen, if Mr. Sandbach had not caught
her.

"We must go back, we must go back at once," said my Rose, who was quite
the most collected of the party. "But I hope--I feel he is safe."

Such was the cowardice of Leyland, that he objected. But, finding
himself in a minority, and being afraid of being left alone, he gave in.
Rose and I supported my poor wife, Mr. Sandbach and Miss Robinson helped
Miss Mary, and we returned slowly and silently, taking forty minutes to
ascend the path that we had descended in ten.

Our conversation was naturally disjointed, as no one wished to offer an
opinion on what had happened. Rose was the most talkative: she startled
us all by saying that she had very nearly stopped where she was.

"Do you mean to say that you weren't--that you didn't feel compelled to
go?" said Mr. Sandbach.

"Oh, of course, I did feel frightened"--she was the first to use the
word--"but I somehow felt that if I could stop on it would be quite
different, that I shouldn't be frightened at all, so to speak." Rose
never did express herself clearly: still, it is greatly to her credit
that she, the youngest of us, should have held on so long at that
terrible time.

"I should have stopped, I do believe," she continued, "if I had not seen
mamma go."

Rose's experience comforted us a little about Eustace. But a feeling of
terrible foreboding was on us all, as we painfully climbed the
chestnut-covered slopes and neared the little clearing. When we reached
it our tongues broke loose. There, at the further side, were the remains
of our lunch, and close to them, lying motionless on his back, was
Eustace.

With some presence of mind I at once cried out: "Hey, you young monkey!
jump up!" But he made no reply, nor did he answer when his poor aunts
spoke to him. And, to my unspeakable horror, I saw one of those green
lizards dart out from under his shirt-cuff as we approached.

We stood watching him as he lay there so silently, and my ears began to
tingle in expectation of the outbursts of lamentations and tears.

Miss Mary fell on her knees beside him and touched his hand, which was
convulsively entwined in the long grass.

As she did so, he opened his eyes and smiled.

I have often seen that peculiar smile since, both on the possessor's
face and on the photographs of him that are beginning to get into the
illustrated papers. But, till then, Eustace had always worn a peevish,
discontented frown; and we were all unused to this disquieting smile,
which always seemed to be without adequate reason.

His aunts showered kisses on him, which he did not reciprocate, and then
there was an awkward pause, Eustace seemed so natural and undisturbed,
yet, if he had not had astonishing experiences himself, he ought to have
been all the more astonished at our extraordinary behaviour. My wife,
with ready tact, endeavoured to behave as if nothing had happened.

"Well, Mr. Eustace," she said, sitting down as she spoke, to ease her
foot, "how have you been amusing yourself since we have been away?"

"Thank you, Mrs. Tytler, I have been very happy."

"And where have you been?"

"Here."

"And lying down all the time, you idle boy?"

"No, not all the time."

"What were you doing before?"

"Oh; standing or sitting."

"Stood and sat doing nothing! Don't you know the poem 'Satan finds some
mischief still for----'"

"Oh, my dear madam, hush! hush!" Mr. Sandbach's voice broke in; and my
wife, naturally mortified by the interruption, said no more and moved
away. I was surprised to see Rose immediately take her place, and, with
more freedom than she generally displayed, run her fingers through the
boy's tousled hair.

"Eustace! Eustace!" she said, hurriedly, "tell me everything--every
single thing."

Slowly he sat up--till then he had lain on his back.

"Oh, Rose," he whispered, and, my curiosity being aroused, I moved
nearer to hear what he was going to say. As I did so, I caught sight of
some goats' footmarks in the moist earth beneath the trees.

"Apparently you have had a visit from some goats," I observed. "I had no
idea they fed up here."

Eustace laboriously got on to his feet and came to see; and when he saw
the footmarks he lay down and rolled on them, as a dog rolls in dirt.

After that there was a grave silence, broken at length by the solemn
speech of Mr. Sandbach.

"My dear friends," he said, "it is best to confess the truth bravely. I
know that what I am going to say now is what you are all now feeling.
The Evil One has been very near us in bodily form. Time may yet discover
some injury that he has wrought among us. But, at present, for myself at
all events, I wish to offer up thanks for a merciful deliverance."

With that he knelt down, and, as the others knelt, I knelt too, though I
do not believe in the Devil being allowed to assail us in visible form,
as I told Mr. Sandbach afterwards. Eustace came too, and knelt quietly
enough between his aunts after they had beckoned to him. But when it was
over he at once got up, and began hunting for something.

"Why! Someone has cut my whistle in two," he said. (I had seen Leyland
with an open knife in his hand--a superstitious act which I could hardly
approve.)

"Well, it doesn't matter," he continued.

"And why doesn't it matter?" said Mr. Sandbach, who has ever since tried
to entrap Eustace into an account of that mysterious hour.

"Because I don't want it any more."

"Why?"

At that he smiled; and, as no one seemed to have anything more to say, I
set off as fast as I could through the wood, and hauled up a donkey to
carry my poor wife home. Nothing occurred in my absence, except that
Rose had again asked Eustace to tell her what had happened; and he, this
time, had turned away his head, and had not answered her a single word.

As soon as I returned, we all set off. Eustace walked with difficulty,
almost with pain, so that, when we reached the other donkeys, his aunts
wished him to mount one of them and ride all the way home. I make it a
rule never to interfere between relatives, but I put my foot down at
this. As it turned out, I was perfectly right, for the healthy exercise,
I suppose, began to thaw Eustace's sluggish blood and loosen his
stiffened muscles. He stepped out manfully, for the first time in his
life, holding his head up and taking deep draughts of air into his
chest. I observed with satisfaction to Miss Mary Robinson, that Eustace
was at last taking some pride in his personal appearance.

Mr. Sandbach sighed, and said that Eustace must be carefully watched,
for we none of us understood him yet. Miss Mary Robinson being very
much--over much, I think--guided by him, sighed too.

"Come, come. Miss Robinson," I said, "there's nothing wrong with
Eustace. Our experiences are mysterious, not his. He was astonished at
our sudden departure, that's why he was so strange when we returned. He's
right enough--improved, if anything."

"And is the worship of athletics, the cult of insensate activity, to be
counted as an improvement?" put in Leyland, fixing a large, sorrowful
eye on Eustace, who had stopped to scramble on to a rock to pick some
cyclamen. "The passionate desire to rend from Nature the few beauties
that have been still left her--that is to be counted as an improvement
too?"

It is mere waste of time to reply to such remarks, especially when they
come from an unsuccessful artist, suffering from a damaged finger. I
changed the conversation by asking what we should say at the hotel.
After some discussion, it was agreed that we should say nothing, either
there or in our letters home. Importunate truth-telling, which brings
only bewilderment and discomfort to the hearers, is, in my opinion, a
mistake; and, after a long discussion, I managed to make Mr. Sandbach
acquiesce in my view.

Eustace did not share in our conversation. He was racing about, like a
real boy, in the wood to the right. A strange feeling of shame;
prevented us from openly mentioning our fright to him. Indeed, it seemed
almost reasonable to conclude that it had made but little impression on
him. So it disconcerted us when he bounded back with an armful of
flowering acanthus, calling out:

"Do you suppose Gennaro'll be there when we get back?"

Gennaro was the stop-gap waiter, a clumsy, impertinent fisher-lad, who
had been had up from Minori in the absence of the nice English-speaking
Emmanuele. It was to him that we owed our scrappy lunch; and I could not
conceive why Eustace desired to see him, unless it was to make mock with
him of our behaviour.

"Yes, of course he will be there," said Miss Robinson. "Why do you ask,
dear?"

"Oh, I thought I'd like to see him."

"And why?" snapped Mr. Sandbach.

"Because, because I do, I do; because, because I do." He danced away
into the darkening wood to the rhythm of his words.

"This is very extraordinary," said Mr. Sandbach. "Did he like Gennaro
before?"

"Gennaro has only been here two days," said Rose, "and I know that they
haven't spoken to each other a dozen times."

Each time Eustace returned from the wood his spirits were higher. Once
he came whooping down on us as a wild Indian, and another time he made
believe to be a dog. The last time he came back with a poor dazed hare,
too frightened to move, sitting on his arm. He was getting too
uproarious, I thought; and we were all glad to leave the wood, and start
upon the steep staircase path that leads down into Ravello. It was late
and turning dark; and we made all the speed we could, Eustace scurrying
in front of us like a goat.

Just where the staircase path debouches on the white high road, the next
extraordinary incident of this extraordinary day occurred. Three old
women were standing by the wayside. They, like ourselves, had come down
from the woods, and they were resting their heavy bundles of fuel on the
low parapet of the road. Eustace stopped in front of them, and, after a
moment's deliberation, stepped forward and--kissed the left-hand one on
the cheek!

"My good fellow!" exclaimed Mr. Sandbach, "are you quite crazy?"

Eustace said nothing, but offered the old woman some of his flowers, and
then hurried on. I looked back; and the old woman's companions seemed as
much astonished at the proceeding as we were. But she herself had put
the flowers in her bosom, and was murmuring blessings.

This salutation of the old lady was the first example of Eustace's
strange behaviour, and we were both surprised and alarmed. It was
useless talking to him, for he either made silly replies, or else
bounded away without replying at all.

He made no reference on the way home to Gennaro, and I hoped that that
was forgotten. But, when we came to the Piazza, in front of the
Cathedral, he screamed out: "Gennaro! Gennaro!" at the top of his voice,
and began running up the little alley that led to the hotel. Sure
enough, there was Gennaro at the end of it, with his arms and legs
sticking out of the nice little English-speaking waiter's dress suit,
and a dirty fisherman's cap on his head--for, as the poor landlady truly
said, however much she superintended his toilette, he always managed to
introduce something incongruous into it before he had done.

Eustace sprang to meet him, and leapt right up into his arms, and put
his own arms round his neck. And this in the presence, not only of us,
but also of the landlady, the chambermaid, the facchino, and of two
American ladies who were coming for a few days' visit to the little
hotel.

I always make a point of behaving pleasantly to Italians, however little
they may deserve it; but this habit of promiscuous intimacy was
perfectly intolerable and could only lead to familiarity and
mortification for all. Taking Miss Robinson aside, I asked her
permission to speak seriously to Eustace on the subject of intercourse
with social inferiors. She granted it; but I determined to wait till the
absurd boy had calmed down a little from the excitement of the day.
Meanwhile, Gennaro, instead of attending to the wants of the two new
ladies, carried Eustace into the house, as if it was the most natural
thing in the world.

"Ho capito," I heard him say as he passed me. 'Ho capito' is the Italian
for 'I have understood'; but, as Eustace had not spoken to him, I could
not see the force of the remark. It served to increase our bewilderment,
and, by the time we sat down at the dinner-table, our imaginations and
our tongues were alike exhausted.

I omit from this account the various comments that were made, as few of
them seem worthy of being recorded. But, for three or four hours, seven
of us were pouring forth our bewilderment in a stream of appropriate and
inappropriate exclamations. Some traced a connection between our
behaviour in the afternoon and the behaviour of Eustace now. Others saw
no connexion at all. Mr. Sandbach still held to the possibility of
infernal influences, and also said that he ought to have a doctor.
Leyland only saw the development of "that unspeakable Philistine, the
boy." Rose maintained, to my surprise, that everything was excusable;
while I began to see that the young gentleman wanted a sound thrashing.
The poor Miss Robinsons swayed helplessly about between these diverse
opinions; inclining now to careful supervision, now to acquiescence, now
to corporal chastisement, now to Eno's Fruit Salt.

Dinner passed off fairly well, though Eustace was terribly fidgety,
Gennaro as usual dropping the knives and spoons, and hawking and
clearing his throat. He only knew a few words of English, and we were
all reduced to Italian for making known our wants. Eustace, who had
picked up a little somehow, asked for some oranges. To my annoyance,
Gennaro, in his answer made use of the second person singular--a form
only used when addressing those who are both intimates and equals.
Eustace had brought it on himself; but an impertinence of this kind was
an affront to us all, and I was determined to speak, and to speak at
once.

When I heard him clearing the table I went in, and, summoning up my
Italian, or rather Neapolitan--the Southern dialects are execrable--I
said, "Gennaro! I heard you address Signor Eustace with 'Tu.'"

"It is true."

"You are not right. You must use 'Lei' or 'Voi'--more polite forms. And
remember that, though Signor Eustace is sometimes silly and
foolish--this afternoon for example--yet you must always behave
respectfully to him; for he is a young English gentleman, and you are a
poor Italian fisher-boy."

I know that speech sounds terribly snobbish, but in Italian one can say
things that one would never dream of saying in English. Besides, it is
no good speaking delicately to persons of that class. Unless you put
things plainly, they take a vicious pleasure in misunderstanding you.

An honest English fisherman would have landed me one in the eye in a
minute for such a remark, but the wretched down-trodden Italians have no
pride. Gennaro only sighed, and said: "It is true."

"Quite so," I said, and turned to go. To my indignation I heard him add:
"But sometimes it is not important."

"What do you mean?" I shouted.

He came close up to me with horrid gesticulating fingers.

"Signor Tytler, I wish to say this. If Eustazio asks me to call him
'Voi,' I will call him 'Voi.' Otherwise, no."

With that he seized up a tray of dinner things, and fled from the room
with them; and I heard two more wine-glasses go on the court-yard floor.

I was now fairly angry, and strode out to interview Eustace. But he had
gone to bed, and the landlady, to whom I also wished to speak, was
engaged. After more vague wonderings, obscurely expressed owing to the
presence of Janet and the two American ladies, we all went to bed, too,
after a harassing and most extraordinary day.



III


But the day was nothing to the night.

I suppose I had slept for about four hours, when I woke suddenly
thinking I heard a noise in the garden. And, immediately, before my eyes
were open, cold terrible fear seized me--not fear of something that was
happening, like the fear in the wood, but fear of something that might
happen.

Our room was on the first floor, looking out on to the garden--or
terrace, it was rather: a wedge-shaped block of ground covered with
roses and vines, and intersected with little asphalt paths. It was
bounded on the small side by the house; round the two long sides ran a
wall, only three feet above the terrace level, but with a good twenty
feet drop over it into the olive yards, for the ground fell very
precipitously away.

Trembling all over I stole to the window. There, pattering up and down
the asphalt, paths, was something white. I was too much alarmed to see
clearly; and in the uncertain light of the stars the thing took all
manner of curious shapes. Now it was a great dog, now an enormous white
bat, now a mass of quickly travelling cloud. It would bounce like a
ball, or take short flights like a bird, or glide slowly; like a wraith.
It gave no sound--save the pattering sound of what, after all, must be
human feet. And at last the obvious explanation forced itself upon my
disordered mind; and I realized that Eustace had got out of bed, and
that we were in for something more.

I hastily dressed myself, and went down into the dining-room which
opened upon the terrace. The door was already unfastened. My terror had
almost entirely passed away, but for quite five minutes I struggled with
a curious cowardly feeling, which bade me not interfere with the poor
strange boy, but leave him to his ghostly patterings, and merely watch
him from the window, to see he took no harm.

But better impulses prevailed and, opening the door, I called out:

"Eustace! what on earth are you doing? Come in at once."

He stopped his antics, and said: "I hate my bedroom. I could not stop in
it, it is too small."

"Come! come! I'm tired of affectation. You've never complained of it
before."

"Besides I can't see anything--no flowers, no leaves, no sky: only a
stone wall." The outlook of Eustace's room certainly was limited; but,
as I told him, he had never complained of it before.

"Eustace, you talk like a child. Come in! Prompt obedience, if you
please."

He did not move.

"Very well: I shall carry you in by force." I added, and made a few
steps towards him. But I was soon convinced of the futility of pursuing
a boy through a tangle of asphalt paths, and went in instead, to call
Mr. Sandbach and Leyland to my aid.

When I returned with them he was worse than ever. He would not even
answer us when we spoke, but began singing and chattering to himself in
a most alarming way.

"It's a case for the doctor now," said Mr. Sandbach, gravely tapping his
forehead.

He had stopped his running and was singing, first low, then
loud--singing five-finger exercises, scales, hymn tunes, scraps of
Wagner--anything that came into his head. His voice--a very untuneful
voice--grew stronger and stronger, and he ended with a tremendous shout
which boomed like a gun among the mountains, and awoke everyone who was
still sleeping in the hotel. My poor wife and the two girls appeared at
their respective windows, and the American ladies were heard violently
ringing their bell.

"Eustace," we all cried, "stop! stop, dear boy, and come into the
house."

He shook his head, and started off again--talking this time. Never have
I listened to such an extraordinary speech. At any other time it would
have been ludicrous, for here was a boy, with no sense of beauty and a
puerile command of words, attempting to tackle themes which the greatest
poets have found almost beyond their power. Eustace Robinson, aged
fourteen, was standing in his nightshirt saluting, praising, and
blessing, the great forces and manifestations of Nature.

He spoke first of night and the stars and planets above his head, of the
swarms of fire-flies below him, of the invisible sea below the
fire-flies, of the great rocks covered with anemones and shells that
were slumbering in the invisible sea. He spoke of the rivers and
water-falls, of the ripening bunches of grapes, of the smoking cone of
Vesuvius and the hidden fire-channels that made the smoke, of the
myriads of lizards who were lying curled up in the crannies of the
sultry earth, of the showers of white rose-leaves that were tangled in
his hair. And then he spoke of the rain and the wind by which all things
are changed, of the air through which all things live, and of the woods
in which all things can be hidden.

Of course, it was all absurdly high fainting: yet I could have kicked
Leyland for audibly observing that it was 'a diabolical caricature of
all that was most holy and beautiful in life.'

"And then,"--Eustace was going on in the pitiable conversational
doggerel which was his only mode of expression--"and then there are
men, but I can't make them out so well." He knelt down by the parapet,
and rested his head on his arms.

"Now's the time," whispered Leyland. I hate stealth, but we darted
forward and endeavoured to catch hold of him from behind. He was away in
a twinkling, but turned round at once to look at us. As far as I could
see in the starlight, he was crying. Leyland rushed at him again, and we
tried to corner him among the asphalt paths, but without the slightest
approach to success.

We returned, breathless and discomfited, leaving him to his madness in
the further corner of the terrace. But my Rose had an inspiration.

"Papa," she called from the window, "if you get Gennaro, he might be
able to catch him for you."

I had no wish to ask a favour of Gennaro, but, as the landlady had by
now appeared on the scene, I begged her to summon him from the
charcoal-bin in which he slept, and make him try what he could do.

She soon returned, and was shortly followed by Gennaro, attired in a
dress coat, without either waistcoat, shirt, or vest, and a ragged pair
of what had been trousers, cut short above the knees for purposes of
wading. The landlady, who had quite picked up English ways, rebuked him
for the incongruous and even indecent appearance which he presented.

"I have a coat and I have trousers. What more do you desire?"

"Never mind, Signora Scafetti," I put in, "As there are no ladies here,
it is not of the slightest consequence." Then, turning to Gennaro, I
said: "The aunts of Signor Eustace wish you to fetch him into the
house."

He did not answer.

"Do you hear me? He is not well. I order you to fetch him into the
house."

"Fetch! fetch!" said Signora Scafetti, and shook him roughly by the arm.

"Eustazio is well where he is."

"Fetch! fetch!" Signora Scafetti screamed, and let loose a flood of
Italian, most of which, I am glad to say, I could not follow. I glanced
up nervously at the girls' window, but they hardly know as much as I do,
and I am thankful to say that none of us caught one word of Gennaro's
answer.

The two yelled and shouted at each other for quite ten minutes, at the
end of which Gennaro rushed back to his charcoal-bin and Signora
Scafetti burst into tears, as well she might, for she greatly valued her
English guests.

"He says," she sobbed, "that Signer Eustace is well where he is, and
that he will not fetch him. I can do no more."

But I could, for, in my stupid British way, I have got some insight into
the Italian character. I followed Mr. Gennaro to his place of repose,
and found him wriggling down on to a dirty sack.

"I wish you to fetch Signor Eustace to me," I began.

He hurled at me an unintelligible reply.

"If you fetch him, I will give you this." And out of my pocket I took a
new ten lira note.

This time he did not answer.

"This note is equal to ten lire in silver," I continued, for I knew that
the poor-class Italian is unable to conceive of a single large sum.

"I know it."

"That is, two hundred soldi."

"I do not desire them. Eustazio is my friend."

I put the note into my pocket.

"Besides, you would not give it me."

"I am an Englishman. The English always do what they promise."

"That is true." It is astonishing how the most dishonest of nations
trust us. Indeed they often trust us more than we trust one another.
Gennaro knelt up on his sack. It was too dark to see his face, but I
could feel his warm garlicky breath coming out in gasps, and I knew that
the eternal avarice of the South had laid hold upon him.

"I could not fetch Eustazio to the house. He might die there."

"You need not do that," I replied patiently. "You need only bring him to
me; and I will stand outside in the garden." And to this, as if it were
something quite different, the pitiable youth consented.

"But give me first the ten lire."

"No,"--for I knew the kind of person with whom I had to deal. Once
faithless, always faithless.

We returned to the terrace, and Gennaro, without a single word, pattered
off towards the pattering that could be heard at the remoter end. Mr.
Sandbach, Leyland, and myself moved away a little from the house, and
stood in the shadow of the white climbing roses, practically invisible.

We heard "Eustazio" called, followed by absurd cries of pleasure from
the poor boy. The pattering ceased, and we heard them talking. Their
voices got nearer, and presently I could discern them through the
creepers, the grotesque figure of the young man, and the slim little
white-robed boy. Gennaro had his arm round Eustace's neck, and Eustace
was talking away in his fluent, slip-shod Italian.

"I understand almost everything," I heard him say. "The trees, hills,
stars, water, I can see all. But isn't it odd! I can't make out men a
bit. Do you know what I mean?"

"Ho capito," said Gennaro gravely, and took his arm off Eustace's
shoulder. But I made the new note crackle in my pocket; and he heard it.
He stuck his hand out with a jerk; and the unsuspecting Eustace gripped
it in his own.

"It is odd!" Eustace went on--they were quite close now--"It almost
seems as if--as if----"

I darted out and caught hold of his arm, and Leyland got hold of the
other arm, and Mr. Sandbach hung on to his feet. He gave shrill
heart-piercing screams; and the white roses, which were falling early
that year, descended in showers on him as we dragged him into the house.

As soon as we entered the house he stopped shrieking; but floods of
tears silently burst forth, and spread over his upturned face.

"Not to my room," he pleaded. "It is so small."

His infinitely dolorous look filled me with strange pity, but what could
I do? Besides, his window was the only one that had bars to it.

"Never mind, dear boy," said kind Mr. Sandbach. "I will bear you company
till the morning."

At this his convulsive struggles began again. "Oh, please, not that.
Anything but that. I will promise to lie still and not to cry more than
I can help, if I am left alone."

So we laid him on the bed, and drew the sheets over him, and left him
sobbing bitterly, and saying: "I nearly saw everything, and now I can
see nothing at all."

We informed the Miss Robinsons of all that had happened, and returned to
the dining-room, where we found Signora Scafetti and Gennaro whispering
together. Mr. Sandbach got pen and paper, and began writing to the
English doctor at Naples. I at once drew out the note, and flung it down
on the table to Gennaro.

"Here is your pay," I said sternly, for I was thinking of the Thirty
Pieces of Silver.

"Thank you very much, sir," said Gennaro, and grabbed it.

He was going off, when Leyland, whose interest and indifference were
always equally misplaced, asked him what Eustace had meant by saying 'he
could not make out men a bit.'

"I cannot say. Signor Eustazio--" (I was glad to observe a little
deference at last) "has a subtle brain. He understands many things."

"But I heard you say you understood," Leyland persisted.

"I understand, but I cannot explain. I am a poor Italian fisher-lad.
Yet, listen: I will try." I saw to my alarm that his manner was
changing, and tried to stop him. But he sat down on the edge of the
table and started off, with some absolutely incoherent remarks.

"It is sad," he observed at last. "What has happened is very sad. But
what can I do? I am poor. It is not I."

I turned away in contempt. Leyland went on asking questions. He wanted
to know who it was that Eustace had in his mind when he spoke.

"That is easy to say," Gennaro gravely answered. "It is you, it is I. It
is all in this house, and many outside it. If he wishes for mirth, we
discomfort him. If he asks to be alone, we disturb him. He longed for a
friend, and found none for fifteen years. Then he found me, and the
first night I--I who have been in the woods and understood things
too--betray him to you, and send him in to die. But what could I do?"

"Gently, gently," said I.

"Oh, assuredly he will die. He will lie in the small room all night, and
in the morning he will be dead. That I know for certain."

"There, that will do," said Mr. Sandbach. "I shall be sitting with him."

"Filomena Giusti sat all night with Caterina, but Caterina was dead in
the morning. They would not let her out, though I begged, and prayed,
and cursed, and beat the door, and climbed the wall. They were ignorant
fools, and thought I wished to carry her away. And in the morning she
was dead."

"What is all this?" I asked Signora Scafetti.

"All kinds of stories will get about," she replied, "and he, least of
anyone, has reason to repeat them."

"And I am alive now," he went on, "because I had neither parents nor
relatives nor friends, so that, when the first night came, I could run
through the woods, and climb the rocks, and plunge into the water, until
I had accomplished my desire!"

We heard a cry from Eustace's room--a faint but steady sound, like the
sound of wind in a distant wood, heard by one standing in tranquillity.

"That," said Gennaro, "was the last noise of Caterina. I was hanging on
to her window then, and it blew out past me."

And, lifting up his hand, in which my ten lira note was safely packed,
he solemnly cursed Mr. Sandbach, and Leyland, and myself, and Fate,
because Eustace was dying in the upstairs room. Such is the working of
the Southern mind; and I verily believe that he would not have moved
even then, had not Leyland, that unspeakable idiot, upset the lamp with
his elbow. It was a patent self-extinguishing lamp, bought by Signora
Scafetti, at my special request, to replace the dangerous thing that she
was using. The result was, that it went out; and the mere physical
change from light to darkness had more power over the ignorant animal
nature of Gennaro than the most obvious dictates of logic and reason.

I felt, rather than saw, that he had left the room, and shouted out to
Mr. Sandbach: "Have you got the key of Eustace's room in your pocket?"
But Mr. Sandbach and Leyland were both on the floor, having mistaken
each other for Gennaro, and some more precious time was wasted in
finding a match. Mr. Sandbach had only just time to say that he had left
the key in the door, in case the Miss Robinsons wished to pay Eustace a
visit, when we heard a noise on the stairs, and there was Gennaro,
carrying Eustace down.

We rushed out and blocked up the passage, and they lost heart and
retreated to the upper landing.

"Now they are caught," cried Signora Scafetti. "There is no other way
out."

We were cautiously ascending the staircase, when there was a terrific
scream from my wife's room, followed by a heavy thud on the asphalt
path. They had leapt out of her window.

I reached the terrace just in time to see Eustace jumping over the
parapet of the garden wall. This time I knew for certain he would be
killed. But he alighted in an olive tree, looking like a great white
moth; and from the tree he slid on to the earth. And as soon as his bare
feet touched the clods of earth he uttered a strange loud cry, such as I
should not have thought the human voice could have produced, and
disappeared among the trees below.

"He has understood and he is saved," cried Gennaro, who was still
sitting on the asphalt path. "Now, instead of dying he will live!"

"And you, instead of keeping the ten lire, will give them up," I
retorted, for at this theatrical remark I could contain myself no
longer.

"The ten lire are mine," he hissed back, in a scarcely audible voice. He
clasped his hand over his breast to protect his ill-gotten gains, and,
as he did so, he swayed forward and fell upon his face on the path. He
had not broken any limbs, and a leap like that would never have killed
an Englishman, for the drop was not great. But those miserable Italians
have no stamina. Something had gone wrong inside him, and he was dead.

The morning was still far off, but the morning breeze had begun, and
more rose leaves fell on us as we carried him in. Signora Scafetti burst
into screams at the sight of the dead body, and, far down the valley
towards the sea, there still resounded the shouts and the laughter of
the escaping boy.




THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HEDGE


My pedometer told me that I was twenty-five; and, though it is a
shocking thing to stop walking, I was so tired that I sat down on a
milestone to rest. People outstripped me, jeering as they did so, but I
was too apathetic to feel resentful, and even when Miss Eliza Dimbleby,
the great educationist, swept past, exhorting me to persevere, I only
smiled and raised my hat.

At first I thought I was going to be like my brother, whom I had had to
leave by the road-side a year or two round the corner. He had wasted his
breath on singing, and his strength on helping others. But I had
travelled more wisely, and now it was only the monotony of the highway
that oppressed me--dust under foot and brown crackling hedges on either
side, ever since I could remember.

And I had already dropped several things--indeed, the road behind was
strewn with the things we all had dropped; and the white dust was
settling down on them, so that already they looked no better than
stones. My muscles were so weary that I could not even bear the weight
of those things I still carried. I slid off the milestone into the road,
and lay there prostrate, with my face to the great parched hedge,
praying that I might give up.

A little puff of air revived me. It seemed to come from the hedge; and,
when I opened my eyes, there was a glint of light through the tangle of
boughs and dead leaves. The hedge could not be as thick as usual. In my
weak, morbid state, I longed to force my way in, and see what was on the
other side. No one was in sight, or I should not have dared to try. For
we of the road do not admit in conversation that there is another side
at all.

I yielded to the temptation, saying to myself that I would come back in
a minute. The thorns scratched my face, and I had to use my arms as a
shield, depending on my feet alone to push me forward. Halfway through I
would have gone back, for in the passage all the things I was carrying
were scraped off me, and my clothes were torn. But I was so wedged that
return was impossible, and I had to wriggle blindly forward, expecting
every moment that my strength would fail me, and that I should perish in
the undergrowth.

Suddenly cold water closed round my head, and I seemed sinking down for
ever. I had fallen out of the hedge into a deep pool. I rose to the
surface at last, crying for help, and I heard someone on the opposite
bank laugh and say: "Another!" And then I was twitched out and laid
panting on the dry ground.

Even when the water was out of my eyes, I was still dazed, for I had
never been in so large a space, nor seen such grass and sunshine. The
blue sky was no longer a strip, and beneath it the earth had risen
grandly into hills--clean, bare buttresses, with beech trees in their
folds, and meadows and clear pools at their feet. But the hills were not
high, and there was in the landscape a sense of human occupation--so
that one might have called it a park, or garden, if the words did not
imply a certain triviality and constraint.

As soon as I got my breath, I turned to my rescuer and said:

"Where does this place lead to?"

"Nowhere, thank the Lord!" said he, and laughed. He was a man of fifty
or sixty--just the kind of age we mistrust on the road--but there was no
anxiety in his manner, and his voice was that of a boy of eighteen.

"But it must lead somewhere!" I cried, too much surprised at his answer
to thank him for saving my life.

"He wants to know where it leads!" he shouted to some men on the hill
side, and they laughed back, and waved their caps.

I noticed then that the pool into which I had fallen was really a moat
which bent round to the left and to the right, and that the hedge
followed it continually. The hedge was green on this side--its roots
showed through the clear water, and fish swam about in them--and it was
wreathed over with dog-roses and Traveller's Joy. But it was a barrier,
and in a moment I lost all pleasure in the grass, the sky, the trees,
the happy men and women, and realized that the place was but a prison,
for all its beauty and extent.

We moved away from the boundary, and then followed a path almost
parallel to it, across the meadows. I found it difficult walking, for I
was always trying to out-distance my companion, and there was no
advantage in doing this if the place led nowhere. I had never kept step
with anyone since I left my brother.

I amused him by stopping suddenly and saying disconsolately, "This is
perfectly terrible. One cannot advance: one cannot progress. Now we of
the road----"

"Yes. I know."

"I was going to say, we advance continually."

"I know."

"We are always learning, expanding, developing. Why, even in my short
life I have seen a great deal of advance--the Transvaal War, the Fiscal
Question, Christian Science, Radium. Here for example--"

I took out my pedometer, but it still marked twenty-five, not a degree
more.

"Oh, it's stopped! I meant to show you. It should have registered all
the time I was walking with you. But it makes me only twenty-five."

"Many things don't work in here," he said, "One day a man brought in a
Lee-Metford, and that wouldn't work."

"The laws of science are universal in their application. It must be the
water in the moat that has injured the machinery. In normal conditions
everything works. Science and the spirit of emulation--those are the
forces that have made us what we are."

I had to break off and acknowledge the pleasant greetings of people whom
we passed. Some of them were singing, some talking, some engaged in
gardening, hay-making, or other rudimentary industries. They all seemed
happy; and I might have been happy too, if I could have forgotten that
the place led nowhere.

I was startled by a young man who came sprinting across our path, took a
little fence in fine style, and went tearing over a ploughed field till
he plunged into a lake, across which he began to swim. Here was true
energy, and I exclaimed: "A cross-country race! Where are the others?"

"There are no others," my companion replied; and, later on, when we
passed some long grass from which came the voice of a girl singing
exquisitely to herself, he said again: "There are no others." I was
bewildered at the waste in production, and murmured to myself, "What
does it all mean?"

He said: "It means nothing but itself"--and he repeated the words
slowly, as if I were a child.

"I understand," I said quietly, "but I do not agree. Every achievement
is worthless unless it is a link in the chain of development. And I must
not trespass on your kindness any longer. I must get back somehow to the
road, and have my pedometer mended."

"First, you must see the gates," he replied, "for we have gates, though
we never use them."

I yielded politely, and before long we reached the moat again, at a
point where it was spanned by a bridge. Over the bridge was a big gate,
as white as ivory, which was fitted into a gap in the boundary hedge.
The gate opened outwards, and I exclaimed in amazement, for from it ran
a road--just such a road as I had left--dusty under foot, with brown
crackling hedges on either side as far as the eye could reach.

"That's my road!" I cried.

He shut the gate and said: "But not your part of the road. It is through
this gate that humanity went out countless ages ago, when it was first
seized with the desire to walk."

I denied this, observing that the part of the road I myself had left was
not more than two miles off. But with the obstinacy of his years he
repeated: "It is the same road. This is the beginning, and though it
seems to run straight away from us, it doubles so often, that it is
never far from our boundary and sometimes touches it." He stooped down
by the moat, and traced on its moist margin an absurd figure like a
maze. As we walked back through the meadows, I tried to convince him of
his mistake.

"The road sometimes doubles, to be sure, but that is part of our
discipline. Who can doubt that its general tendency is onward? To what
goal we know not--it may be to some mountain where we shall touch the
sky, it may be over precipices into the sea. But that it goes forward
--who can doubt that? It is the thought of that that makes us strive to
excel, each in his own way, and gives us an impetus which is lacking
with you. Now that man who passed us--it's true that he ran well, and
jumped well, and swam well; but we have men who can run better, and men
who can jump better, and who can swim better. Specialization has
produced results which would surprise you. Similarly, that girl----"

Here I interrupted myself to exclaim: "Good gracious me! I could have
sworn it was Miss Eliza Dimbleby over there, with her feet in the
fountain!"

He believed that it was.

"Impossible! I left her on the road, and she is due to lecture this
evening at Tunbridge Wells. Why, her train leaves Cannon Street in--of
course my watch has stopped like everything else. She is the last person
to be here."

"People always are astonished at meeting each other. All kinds come
through the hedge, and come at all times--when they are drawing ahead in
the race, when they are lagging behind, when they are left for dead. I
often stand near the boundary listening to the sounds of the road--you
know what they are--and wonder if anyone will turn aside. It is my great
happiness to help someone out of the moat, as I helped you. For our
country fills up slowly, though it was meant for all mankind."

"Mankind have other aims," I said gently, for I thought him
well-meaning; "and I must join them." I bade him good evening, for the
sun was declining, and I wished to be on the road by nightfall. To my
alarm, he caught hold of me, crying: "You are not to go yet!" I tried to
shake him off, for we had no interests in common, and his civility was
becoming irksome to me. But for all my struggles the tiresome old man
would not let go; and, as wrestling is not my speciality, I was obliged
to follow him.

It was true that I could have never found alone the place where I came
in, and I hoped that, when I had seen the other sights about which he
was worrying, he would take me back to it. But I was determined not to
sleep in the country, for I mistrusted it, and the people too, for all
their friendliness. Hungry though I was, I would not join them in their
evening meals of milk and fruit, and, when they gave me flowers, I flung
them away as soon as I could do so unobserved. Already they were lying
down for the night like cattle--some out on the bare hillside, others in
groups under the beeches. In the light of an orange sunset I hurried on
with my unwelcome guide, dead tired, faint for want of food, but
murmuring indomitably: "Give me life, with its struggles and victories,
with its failures and hatreds, with its deep moral meaning and its
unknown goal!"

At last we came to a place where the encircling moat was spanned by
another bridge, and where another gate interrupted the line of the
boundary hedge. It was different from the first gate; for it was half
transparent like horn, and opened inwards. But through it, in the waning
light, I saw again just such a road as I had left--monotonous, dusty,
with brown crackling hedges on either side, as far as the eye could
reach.

I was strangely disquieted at the sight, which seemed to deprive me of
all self-control. A man was passing us, returning for the night to the
hills, with a scythe over his shoulder and a can of some liquid in his
hand. I forgot the destiny of our race. I forgot the road that lay
before my eyes, and I sprang at him, wrenched the can out of his hand,
and began to drink.

It was nothing stronger than beer, but in my exhausted state it overcame
me in a moment. As in a dream, I saw the old man shut the gate, and
heard him say: "This is where your road ends, and through this gate
humanity--all that is left of it--will come in to us."

Though my senses were sinking into oblivion, they seemed to expand ere
they reached it. They perceived the magic song of nightingales, and the
odour of invisible hay, and stars piercing the fading sky. The man whose
beer I had stolen lowered me down gently to sleep off its effects, and,
as he did so, I saw that he was my brother.




THE CELESTIAL OMNIBUS


I


The boy who resided at Agathox Lodge, 28, Buckingham Park Road,
Surbiton, had often been puzzled by the old sign-post that stood almost
opposite. He asked his mother about it, and she replied that it was a
joke, and not a very nice one, which had been made many years back by
some naughty young men, and that the police ought to remove it. For
there were two strange things about this sign-post: firstly, it pointed
up a blank alley, and, secondly, it had painted on it in faded
characters, the words, "To Heaven."

"What kind of young men were they?" he asked.

"I think your father told me that one of them wrote verses, and was
expelled from the University and came to grief in other ways. Still, it
was a long time ago. You must ask your father about it. He will say the
same as I do, that it was put up as a joke."

"So it doesn't mean anything at all?"

She sent him upstairs to put on his best things, for the Bonses were
coming to tea, and he was to hand the cake-stand.

It struck him, as he wrenched on his tightening trousers, that he might
do worse than ask Mr. Bons about the sign-post. His father, though very
kind, always laughed at him--shrieked with laughter whenever he or any
other child asked a question or spoke. But Mr. Bons was serious as well
as kind. He had a beautiful house and lent one books, he was a
churchwarden, and a candidate for the County Council; he had donated to
the Free Library enormously, he presided over the Literary Society, and
had Members of Parliament to stop with him--in short, he was probably
the wisest person alive.

Yet even Mr. Bons could only say that the sign-post was a joke--the joke
of a person named Shelley.

"Off course!" cried the mother; "I told you so, dear. That was the
name."

"Had you never heard of Shelley?" asked Mr. Bons.

"No," said the boy, and hung his head.

"But is there no Shelley in the house?"

"Why, yes!" exclaimed the lady, in much agitation. "Dear Mr. Bons, we
aren't such Philistines as that. Two at the least. One a wedding
present, and the other, smaller print, in one of the spare rooms."

"I believe we have seven Shelleys," said Mr. Bons, with a slow smile.
Then he brushed the cake crumbs off his stomach, and, together with his
daughter, rose to go.

The boy, obeying a wink from his mother, saw them all the way to the
garden gate, and when they had gone he did not at once return to the
house, but gazed for a little up and down Buckingham Park Road.

His parents lived at the right end of it. After No. 39 the quality of
the houses dropped very suddenly, and 64 had not even a separate
servants' entrance. But at the present moment the whole road looked
rather pretty, for the sun had just set in splendour, and the
inequalities of rent were drowned in a saffron afterglow. Small birds
twittered, and the breadwinners' train shrieked musically down through
the cutting--that wonderful cutting which has drawn to itself the whole
beauty out of Surbiton, and clad itself, like any Alpine valley, with
the glory of the fir and the silver birch and the primrose. It was this
cutting that had first stirred desires within the boy--desires for
something just a little different, he knew not what, desires that would
return whenever things were sunlit, as they were this evening, running
up and down inside him, up and down, up and down, till he would feel
quite unusual all over, and as likely as not would want to cry. This
evening he was even sillier, for he slipped across the road towards the
sign-post and began to run up the blank alley.

The alley runs between high walls--the walls of the gardens of "Ivanhoe"
and "Belle Vista" respectively. It smells a little all the way, and is
scarcely twenty yards long, including the turn at the end. So not
unnaturally the boy soon came to a standstill. "I'd like to kick that
Shelley," he exclaimed, and glanced idly at a piece of paper which was
pasted on the wall. Rather an odd piece of paper, and he read it
carefully before he turned back. This is what he read:

            S. AND C.R.C.C.
      _Alteration in Service._

Owing to lack of patronage the Company are regretfully compelled to
suspend the hourly service, and to retain only the

       _Sunrise and Sunset Omnibuses,_

which will run as usual. It is to be hoped that the public will
patronize an arrangement which is intended for their convenience. As an
extra inducement, the Company will, for the first time, now issue

               Return Tickets!

(available one day only), which may be obtained of the driver.
Passengers are again reminded that _no tickets are issued at the other
end_, and that no complaints in this connection will receive
consideration from the Company. Nor will the Company be responsible for
any negligence or stupidity on the part of Passengers, nor for
Hailstorms, Lightning, Loss of Tickets, nor for any Act of God.

                                For the Direction.

Now he had never seen this notice before, nor could he imagine where the
omnibus went to. S. of course was for Surbiton, and R.C.C. meant Road
Car Company. But what was the meaning or the other C.? Coombe and
Maiden, perhaps, of possibly "City." Yet it could not hope to compete
with the South-Western. The whole thing, the boy reflected, was run on
hopelessly unbusiness-like lines. Why no tickets from the other end? And
what an hour to start! Then he realized that unless the notice was a
hoax, an omnibus must have been starting just as he was wishing the
Bonses good-bye. He peered at the ground through the gathering dusk, and
there he saw what might or might not be the marks of wheels. Yet nothing
had come out of the alley. And he had never seen an omnibus at any time
in the Buckingham Park Road. No: it must be a hoax, like the sign-posts,
like the fairy tales, like the dreams upon which he would wake suddenly
in the night. And with a sigh he stepped from the alley--right into the
arms of his father.

Oh, how his father laughed! "Poor, poor Popsey!" he cried. "Diddums!
Diddums! Diddums think he'd walky-palky up to Evvink!" And his mother,
also convulsed with laughter, appeared on the steps of Agathox Lodge.
"Don't, Bob!" she gasped. "Don't be so naughty! Oh, you'll kill me! Oh,
leave the boy alone!"

But all that evening the joke was kept up. The father implored to be
taken too. Was it a very tiring walk? Need one wipe one's shoes on the
door-mat? And the boy went to bed feeling faint and sore, and thankful
for only one thing--that he had not said a word about the omnibus. It
was a hoax, yet through his dreams it grew more and more real, and the
streets of Surbiton, through which he saw it driving, seemed instead to
become hoaxes and shadows. And very early in the morning he woke with a
cry, for he had had a glimpse of its destination.

He struck a match, and its light fell not only on his watch but also on
his calendar, so that he knew it to be half-an-hour to sunrise. It was
pitch dark, for the fog had come down from London in the night, and all
Surbiton was wrapped in its embraces. Yet he sprang out and dressed
himself, for he was determined to settle once for all which was real:
the omnibus or the streets. "I shall be a fool one way or the other," he
thought, "until I know." Soon he was shivering in the road under the gas
lamp that guarded the entrance to the alley.

To enter the alley itself required some courage. Not only was it
horribly dark, but he now realized that it was an impossible terminus
for an omnibus. If it had not been for a policeman, whom he heard
approaching through the fog, he would never have made the attempt. The
next moment he had made the attempt and failed. Nothing. Nothing but a
blank alley and a very silly boy gaping at its dirty floor. It _was_ a
hoax. "I'll tell papa and mamma," he decided. "I deserve it. I deserve
that they should know. I am too silly to be alive." And he went back to
the gate of Agathox Lodge.

There he remembered that his watch was fast. The sun was not risen; it
would not rise for two minutes. "Give the bus every chance," he thought
cynically, and returned into the alley.

But the omnibus was there.



II


It had two horses, whose sides were still smoking from their journey,
and its two great lamps shone through the fog against the alley's walls,
changing their cobwebs and moss into tissues of fairyland. The driver
was huddled up in a cape. He faced the blank wall, and how he had
managed to drive in so neatly and so silently was one of the many things
that the boy never discovered. Nor could he imagine how ever he would
drive out.

"Please," his voice quavered through the foul brown air, "Please, is
that an omnibus?"

"Omnibus est," said the driver, without turning round. There was a
moment's silence. The policeman passed, coughing, by the entrance of the
alley. The boy crouched in the shadow, for he did not want to be found
out. He was pretty sure, too, that it was a Pirate; nothing else, he
reasoned, would go from such odd places and at such odd hours.

"About when do you start?" He tried to sound nonchalant.

"At sunrise."

"How far do you go?"

"The whole way."

"And can I have a return ticket which will bring me all the way back?"

"You can."

"Do you know, I half think I'll come." The driver made no answer. The
sun must have risen, for he unhitched the brake. And scarcely had the
boy jumped in before the omnibus was off.

How? Did it turn? There was no room. Did it go forward? There was a
blank wall. Yet it was moving--moving at a stately pace through the fog,
which had turned from brown to yellow. The thought of warm bed and
warmer breakfast made the boy feel faint. He wished he had not come. His
parents would not have approved. He would have gone back to them if the
weather had not made it impossible. The solitude was terrible; he was
the only passenger. And the omnibus, though well-built, was cold and
somewhat musty. He drew his coat round him, and in so doing chanced to
feel his pocket. It was empty. He had forgotten his purse.

"Stop!" he shouted. "Stop!" And then, being of a polite disposition, he
glanced up at the painted notice-board so that he might call the driver
by name. "Mr. Browne! stop; O, do please stop!"

Mr. Browne did not stop, but he opened a little window and looked in at
the boy. His face was a surprise, so kind it was and modest.

"Mr. Browne, I've left my purse behind. I've not got a penny. I can't
pay for the ticket. Will you take my watch, please? I am in the most
awful hole."

"Tickets on this line," said the driver, "whether single or return, can
be purchased by coinage from no terrene mint. And a chronometer, though
it had solaced the vigils of Charlemagne, or measured the slumbers of
Laura, can acquire by no mutation the double-cake that charms the
fangless Cerberus of Heaven!" So saying, he handed in the necessary
ticket, and, while the boy said "Thank you," continued: "Titular
pretensions, I know it well, are vanity. Yet they merit no censure when
uttered on a laughing lip, and in an homonymous world are in some sort
useful, since they do serve to distinguish one Jack from his fellow.
Remember me, therefore, as Sir Thomas Browne."

"Are you a Sir? Oh, sorry!" He had heard of these gentlemen drivers. "It
_is_ good of you about the ticket. But if you go on at this rate,
however does your bus pay?"

"It does not pay. It was not intended to pay. Many are the faults of my
equipage; it is compounded too curiously of foreign woods; its cushions
tickle erudition rather than promote repose; and my horses are nourished
not on the evergreen pastures of the moment, but on the dried bents and
clovers of Latinity. But that it pays!--that error at all events was
never intended and never attained."

"Sorry again," said the boy rather hopelessly. Sir Thomas looked sad,
fearing that, even for a moment, he had been the cause of sadness. He
invited the boy to come up and sit beside him on the box, and together
they journeyed on through the fog, which was now changing from yellow to
white. There were no houses by the road; so it must be either Putney
Heath or Wimbledon Common.

"Have you been a driver always?"

"I was a physician once."

"But why did you stop? Weren't you good?"

"As a healer of bodies I had scant success, and several score of my
patients preceded me. But as a healer of the spirit I have succeeded
beyond my hopes and my deserts. For though my draughts were not better
nor subtler than those of other men, yet, by reason of the cunning
goblets wherein I offered them, the queasy soul was ofttimes tempted to
sip and be refreshed."

"The queasy soul," he murmured; "if the sun sets with trees in front of
it, and you suddenly come strange all over, is that a queasy soul?"

"Have you felt that?"

"Why yes."

After a pause he told the boy a little, a very little, about the
journey's end. But they did not chatter much, for the boy, when he liked
a person, would as soon sit silent in his company as speak, and this, he
discovered, was also the mind of Sir Thomas Browne and of many others
with whom he was to be acquainted. He heard, however, about the young
man Shelley, who was now quite a famous person, with a carriage of his
own, and about some of the other drivers who are in the service of the
Company. Meanwhile the light grew stronger, though the fog did not
disperse. It was now more like mist than fog, and at times would travel
quickly across them, as if it was part of a cloud. They had been
ascending, too, in a most puzzling way; for over two hours the horses
had been pulling against the collar, and even if it were Richmond Hill
they ought to have been at the top long ago. Perhaps it was Epsom, or
even the North Downs; yet the air seemed keener than that which blows on
either. And as to the name of their destination, Sir Thomas Browne was
silent.

Crash!

"Thunder, by Jove!" said the boy, "and not so far off either. Listen to
the echoes! It's more like mountains."

He thought, not very vividly, of his father and mother. He saw them
sitting down to sausages and listening to the storm. He saw his own
empty place. Then there would be questions, alarms, theories, jokes,
consolations. They would expect him back at lunch. To lunch he would not
come, nor to tea, but he would be in for dinner, and so his day's
truancy would be over. If he had had his purse he would have bought them
presents--not that he should have known what to get them.

Crash!

The peal and the lightning came together. The cloud quivered as if it
were alive, and torn streamers of mist rushed past. "Are you afraid?"
asked Sir Thomas Browne.

"What is there to be afraid of? Is it much farther?"

The horses of the omnibus stopped just as a ball of fire burst up and
exploded with a ringing noise that was deafening but clear, like the
noise of a blacksmith's forge. All the cloud was shattered.

"Oh, listen. Sir Thomas Browne! No, I mean look; we shall get a view at
last. No, I mean listen; that sounds like a rainbow!"

The noise had died into the faintest murmur, beneath which another
murmur grew, spreading stealthily, steadily, in a curve that widened but
did not vary. And in widening curves a rainbow was spreading from the
horses' feet into the dissolving mists.

"But how beautiful! What colours! Where will it stop? It is more like
the rainbows you can tread on. More like dreams."

The colour and the sound grew together. The rainbow spanned an enormous
gulf. Clouds rushed under it and were pierced by it, and still it grew,
reaching forward, conquering the darkness, until it touched something
that seemed more solid than a cloud.

The boy stood up. "What is that out there?" he called. "What does it
rest on, out at that other end?"

In the morning sunshine a precipice shone forth beyond the gulf A
precipice--or was it a castle? The horses moved. They set their feet
upon the rainbow.

"Oh, look!" the boy shouted. "Oh, listen! Those caves--or are they
gateways? Oh, look between those cliffs at those ledges. I see people! I
see trees!"

"Look also below," whispered Sir Thomas. "Neglect not the diviner
Acheron."

The boy looked below, past the flames of the rainbow that licked against
their wheels. The gulf also had cleared, and in its depths there flowed
an everlasting river. One sunbeam entered and struck a green pool, and
as they passed over he saw three maidens rise to the surface of the
pool, singing, and playing with something that glistened like a ring.

"You down in the water----" he called.

They answered, "You up on the bridge----" There was a burst of music.
"You up on the bridge, good luck to you. Truth in the depth, truth on
the height."

"You down in the water, what are you doing?"

Sir Thomas Browne replied: "They sport in the mancipiary possession of
their gold"; and the omnibus arrived.



III


The boy was in disgrace. He sat locked up in the nursery of Agathox
Lodge, learning poetry for a punishment. His father had said, "My boy! I
can pardon anything but untruthfulness," and had caned him, saying at
each stroke, "There is _no_ omnibus, _no_ driver, _no_ bridge, _no_
mountain; you are a _truant_, _guttersnipe_, a _liar_." His father
could be very stern at times. His mother had begged him to say he was
sorry. But he could not say that. It was the greatest day of his life,
in spite of the caning, and the poetry at the end of it.

He had returned punctually at sunset--driven not by Sir Thomas Browne,
but by a maiden lady who was full of quiet fun. They had talked of
omnibuses and also of barouche landaus. How far away her gentle voice
seemed now! Yet it was scarcely three hours since he had left her up the
alley.

His mother called through the door. "Dear, you are to come down and to
bring your poetry with you."

He came down, and found that Mr. Bons was in the smoking-room with his
father. It had been a dinner party.

"Here is the great traveller!" said his father grimly. "Here is the
young gentleman who drives in an omnibus over rainbows, while young
ladies sing to him." Pleased with his wit, he laughed.

"After all," said Mr. Bons, smiling, "there is something a little like
it in Wagner. It is odd how, in quite illiterate minds, you will find
glimmers of Artistic Truth. The case interests me. Let me plead for the
culprit. We have all romanced in our time, haven't we?"

"Hear how kind Mr. Bons is," said his mother, while his father said,
"Very well. Let him say his Poem, and that will do. He is going away to
my sister on Tuesday, and she will cure him of this alley-slopering."
(Laughter.) "Say your Poem."

The boy began. "'Standing aloof in giant ignorance.'"

His father laughed again--roared. "One for you, my son! 'Standing aloof
in giant ignorance!' I never knew these poets talked sense. Just
describes you. Here, Bons, you go in for poetry. Put him through it,
will you, while I fetch up the whisky?"

"Yes, give me the Keats," said Mr. Bons. "Let him say his Keats to me."

So for a few moments the wise man and the ignorant boy were left alone
in the smoking-room.

"'Standing aloof in giant ignorance, of thee I dream and of the
Cyclades, as one who sits ashore and longs perchance to visit----'"

"Quite right. To visit what?"

"'To visit dolphin coral in deep seas,'" said the boy, and burst into
tears.

"Come, come! why do you cry?"

"Because--because all these words that only rhymed before, now that I've
come back they're me."

Mr. Bons laid the Keats down. The case was more interesting than he had
expected. "_You?_" he exclaimed, "This sonnet, _you_?"

"Yes--and look further on: 'Aye, on the shores of darkness there is
light, and precipices show untrodden green.' It _is_ so, sir. All these
things are true."

"I never doubted it," said Mr. Bons, with closed eyes.

"You--then you believe me? You believe in the omnibus and the driver and
the storm and that return ticket I got for nothing and----"

"Tut, tut! No more of your yarns, my boy. I meant that I never doubted
the essential truth of Poetry. Some day, when you read more, you will
understand what I mean."

"But Mr. Bons, it _is_ so. There _is_ light upon the shores of darkness.
I have seen it coming. Light and a wind."

"Nonsense," said Mr. Bons.

"If I had stopped! They tempted me. They told me to give up my
ticket--for you cannot come back if you lose your ticket. They called
from the river for it, and indeed I was tempted, for I have never been
so happy as among those precipices. But I thought of my mother and
father, and that I must fetch them. Yet they will not come, though the
road starts opposite our house. It has all happened as the people up
there warned me, and Mr. Bons has disbelieved me like every one else. I
have been caned. I shall never see that mountain again."

"What's that about me?" said Mr. Bons, sitting up in his chair very
suddenly.

"I told them about you, and how clever you were, and how many books you
had, and they said, 'Mr. Bons will certainly disbelieve you.'"

"Stuff and nonsense, my young friend. You grow impertinent. I--well--I
will settle the matter. Not a word to your father. I will cure you.
To-morrow evening I will myself call here to take you for a walk, and at
sunset we will go up this alley opposite and hunt for your omnibus, you
silly little boy."

His face grew serious, for the boy was not disconcerted, but leapt about
the room singing, "Joy! joy! I told them you would believe me. We will
drive together over the rainbow. I told them that you would come." After
all, could there be anything in the story? Wagner? Keats? Shelley? Sir
Thomas Browne? Certainly the case was interesting.

And on the morrow evening, though it was pouring with rain, Mr. Bons did
not omit to call at Agathox Lodge.

The boy was ready, bubbling with excitement, and skipping about in a way
that rather vexed the President of the Literary Society. They took a
turn down Buckingham Park Road, and then--having seen that no one was
watching them--slipped up the alley. Naturally enough (for the sun was
setting) they ran straight against the omnibus.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Mr. Bons. "Good gracious heavens!"

It was not the omnibus in which the boy had driven first, nor yet that
in which he had returned. There were three horses--black, gray, and
white, the gray being the finest. The driver, who turned round at the
mention of goodness and of heaven, was a sallow man with terrifying jaws
and sunken eyes. Mr. Bons, on seeing him, gave a cry as if of
recognition, and began to tremble violently.

The boy jumped in.

"Is it possible?" cried Mr. Bons. "Is the impossible possible?"

"Sir; come in, sir. It is such a fine omnibus. Oh, here is his name--Dan
some one."

Mr. Bons sprang in too. A blast of wind immediately slammed the omnibus
door, and the shock jerked down all the omnibus blinds, which were very
weak on their springs.

"Dan.... Show me. Good gracious heavens! we're moving."

"Hooray!" said the boy.

Mr. Bons became flustered. He had not intended to be kidnapped. He could
not find the door-handle, nor push up the blinds. The omnibus was quite
dark, and by the time he had struck a match, night had come on outside
also. They were moving rapidly.

"A strange, a memorable adventure," he said, surveying the interior of
the omnibus, which was large, roomy, and constructed with extreme
regularity, every part exactly answering to every other part. Over the
door (the handle of which was outside) was written, "Lasciate ogni
baldanza voi che entrate"--at least, that was what was written, but Mr.
Bons said that it was Lashy arty something, and that baldanza was a
mistake for speranza. His voice sounded as if he was in church.
Meanwhile, the boy called to the cadaverous driver for two return
tickets. They were handed in without a word. Mr. Bons covered his face
with his hand and again trembled. "Do you know who that is!" he
whispered, when the little window had shut upon them. "It is the
impossible."

"Well, I don't like him as much as Sir Thomas Browne, though I shouldn't
be surprised if he had even more in him."

"More in him?" He stamped irritably. "By accident you have made the
greatest discovery of the century, and all you can say is that there is
more in this man. Do you remember those vellum books in my library,
stamped with red lilies? This--sit still, I bring you stupendous
news!--_this is the man who wrote them_."

The boy sat quite still. "I wonder if we shall see Mrs. Gamp?" he asked,
after a civil pause.

"Mrs. ----?"

"Mrs. Gamp and Mrs. Harris. I like Mrs. Harris. I came upon them quite
suddenly. Mrs. Gamp's bandboxes have moved over the rainbow so badly.
All the bottoms have fallen out, and two of the pippins off her bedstead
tumbled into the stream."

"Out there sits the man who wrote my vellum books!" thundered Mr. Bons,
"and you talk to me of Dickens and of Mrs. Gamp?"

"I know Mrs. Gamp so well," he apologized. "I could not help being glad
to see her. I recognized her voice. She was telling Mrs. Harris about
Mrs. Prig."

"Did you spend the whole day in her elevating company?"

"Oh, no. I raced. I met a man who took me out beyond to a race-course.
You run, and there are dolphins out at sea."

"Indeed. Do you remember the man's name?"

"Achilles. No; he was later. Tom Jones."

Mr. Bons sighed heavily. "Well, my lad, you have made a miserable mess
of it. Think of a cultured person with your opportunities! A cultured
person would have known all these characters and known what to have said
to each. He would not have wasted his time with a Mrs. Gamp or a Tom
Jones. The creations of Homer, of Shakespeare, and of Him who drives us
now, would alone have contented him. He would not have raced. He would
have asked intelligent questions."

"But, Mr. Bons," said the boy humbly, "you will be a cultured person. I
told them so."

"True, true, and I beg you not to disgrace me when we arrive. No
gossiping. No running. Keep close to my side, and never speak to these
Immortals unless they speak to you. Yes, and give me the return tickets.
You will be losing them."

The boy surrendered the tickets, but felt a little sore. After all, he
had found the way to this place. It was hard first to be disbelieved and
then to be lectured. Meanwhile, the rain had stopped, and moonlight
crept into the omnibus through the cracks in the blinds.

"But how is there to be a rainbow?" cried the boy.

"You distract me," snapped Mr. Bons. "I wish to meditate on beauty. I
wish to goodness I was with a reverent and sympathetic person."

The lad bit his lip. He made a hundred good resolutions. He would
imitate Mr. Bons all the visit. He would not laugh, or run, or sing, or
do any of the vulgar things that must have disgusted his new friends
last time. He would be very careful to pronounce their names properly,
and to remember who knew whom. Achilles did not know Tom Jones--at
least, so Mr. Bons said. The Duchess of Malfi was older than Mrs.
Gamp--at least, so Mr. Bons said. He would be self-conscious, reticent,
and prim. He would never say he liked any one. Yet when the Wind flew up
at a chance touch of his head, all these good resolutions went to the
winds, for the omnibus had reached the summit of a moonlit hill, and
there was the chasm, and there, across it, stood the old precipices,
dreaming, with their feet in the everlasting river. He exclaimed, "The
mountain! Listen to the new tune in the water! Look at the camp fires in
the ravines," and Mr. Bons, after a hasty glance, retorted, "Water? Camp
fires? Ridiculous rubbish. Hold your tongue. There is nothing at all."

Yet, under his eyes, a rainbow formed, compounded not of sunlight and
storm, but of moonlight and the spray of the river. The three horses put
their feet upon it. He thought it the finest rainbow he had seen, but
did not dare to say so, since Mr. Bons said that nothing was there. He
leant out--the window had opened--and sang the tune that rose from the
sleeping waters.

"The prelude to Rhinegold?" said Mr. Bons suddenly. "Who taught you
these _leit motifs_?" He, too, looked out of the window. Then he behaved
very oddly. He gave a choking cry, and fell back on to the omnibus
floor. He writhed and kicked. His face was green.

"Does the bridge make you dizzy?" the boy asked.

"Dizzy!" gasped Mr. Bons. "I want to go back. Tell the driver."

But the driver shook his head.

"We are nearly there," said the boy, "They are asleep. Shall I call?
They will be so pleased to see you, for I have prepared them."

Mr. Bons moaned. They moved over the lunar rainbow, which ever and ever
broke away behind their wheels. How still the night was! Who would be
sentry at the Gate?

"I am coming," he shouted, again forgetting the hundred resolutions. "I
am returning--I, the boy."

"The boy is returning," cried a voice to other voices, who repeated,
"The boy is returning."

"I am bringing Mr. Bons with me."

Silence.

"I should have said Mr. Bons is bringing me with him."

Profound silence.

"Who stands sentry?"

"Achilles."

And on the rocky causeway, close to the springing of the rainbow bridge,
he saw a young man who carried a wonderful shield.

"Mr. Bons, it is Achilles, armed."

"I want to go back," said Mr. Bons.

The last fragment of the rainbow melted, the wheels sang upon the living
rock, the door of the omnibus burst open. Out leapt the boy--he could
not resist--and sprang to meet the warrior, who, stooping suddenly,
caught him on his shield.

"Achilles!" he cried, "let me get down, for I am ignorant and vulgar,
and I must wait for that Mr. Bons of whom I told you yesterday."

But Achilles raised him aloft. He crouched on the wonderful shield, on
heroes and burning cities, on vineyards graven in gold, on every dear
passion, every joy, on the entire image of the Mountain that he had
discovered, encircled, like it, with an everlasting stream. "No, no," he
protested, "I am not worthy. It is Mr. Bons who must be up here."

But Mr. Bons was whimpering, and Achilles trumpeted and cried, "Stand
upright upon my shield!"

"Sir, I did not mean to stand! something made me stand. Sir, why do you
delay? Here is only the great Achilles, whom you knew."

Mr. Bons screamed, "I see no one. I see nothing. I want to go back."
Then he cried to the driver, "Save me! Let me stop in your chariot. I
have honoured you. I have quoted you. I have bound you in vellum. Take
me back to my world."

The driver replied, "I am the means and not the end. I am the food and
not the life. Stand by yourself, as that boy has stood. I cannot save
you. For poetry is a spirit; and they that would worship it must worship
in spirit and in truth."

Mr. Bons--he could not resist--crawled out of the beautiful omnibus. His
face appeared, gaping horribly. His hands followed, one gripping the
step, the other beating the air. Now his shoulders emerged, his chest,
his stomach. With a shriek of "I see London," he fell--fell against the
hard, moonlit rock, fell into it as if it were water, fell through it,
vanished, and was seen by the boy no more.

"Where have you fallen to, Mr. Bons? Here is a procession arriving to
honour you with music and torches. Here come the men and women whose
names you know. The mountain is awake, the river is awake, over the
race-course the sea is awaking those dolphins, and it is all for you.
They want you----"

There was the touch of fresh leaves on his forehead. Some one had
crowned him.

                 TELOS

       *       *       *       *       *

From the _Kingston Gazette, Surbiton Times,_ and _Paynes Park Observer_.

The body of Mr. Septimus Bons has been found in a shockingly mutilated
condition in the vicinity of the Bermondsey gas-works. The deceased's
pockets contained a sovereign-purse, a silver cigar-case, a bijou
pronouncing dictionary, and a couple of omnibus tickets. The unfortunate
gentleman had apparently been hurled from a considerable height. Foul
play is suspected, and a thorough investigation is pending by the
authorities.

THE END




OTHER KINGDOM


I


"_Quem_, whom; _fugis_, are you avoiding; _ab demens_, you silly ass;
_habitarunt di quoque_, gods too have lived in; _silvas_, the woods.' Go
ahead!"

I always brighten the classics--it is part of my system--and therefore I
translated _demens_ by "silly ass." But Miss Beaumont need not have made
a note of the translation, and Ford, who knows better, need not have
echoed after me. "Whom are you avoiding, you silly ass, gods too have
lived in the woods."

"Ye--es," I replied, with scholarly hesitation. "Ye--es.
_Silvas_--woods, wooded spaces, the country generally. Yes. _Demens_, of
course, is _de--mens_. 'Ah, witless fellow! Gods, I say, even gods have
dwelt in the woods ere now.'"

"But I thought gods always lived in the sky," said Mrs. Worters,
interrupting our lesson for I think the third-and-twentieth time.

"Not always," answered Miss Beaumont. As she spoke she inserted "witless
fellow" as an alternative to "silly ass."

"I always thought they lived in the sky."

"Oh, no, Mrs. Worters," the girl repeated. "Not always." And finding her
place in the note-book she read as follows: "Gods. Where. Chief
deities--Mount Olympus. Pan--most places, as name implies.
Oreads--mountains. Sirens, Tritons, Nereids--water (salt). Naiads
--water (fresh). Satyrs, Fauns, etc.--woods. Dryads--trees."

"Well, dear, you have learnt a lot. And will you now tell me what good
it has done you?"

"It has helped me--" faltered Miss Beaumont. She was very earnest over
her classics. She wished she could have said what good they had done
her.

Ford came to her rescue, "Of course it's helped you. The classics are
full of tips. They teach you how to dodge things."

I begged my young friend not to dodge his Virgil lesson.

"But they do!" he cried. "Suppose that long-haired brute Apollo wants to
give you a music lesson. Well, out you pop into the laurels. Or
Universal Nature comes along. You aren't feeling particularly keen on
Universal Nature so you turn into a reed."

"Is Jack mad?" asked Mrs. Worters.

But Miss Beaumont had caught the allusions--which were quite ingenious
I must admit. "And Croesus?" she inquired. "What was it one turned into
to get away from Croesus?"

I hastened to tidy up her mythology. "Midas, Miss Beaumont, not Croesus.
And he turns you--you don't turn yourself: he turns you into gold."

"There's no dodging Midas," said Ford.

"Surely--" said Miss Beaumont. She had been learning Latin not quite a
fortnight, but she would have corrected the Regius Professor.

He began to tease her. "Oh, there's no dodging Midas! He just comes, he
touches you, and you pay him several thousand per cent, at once. You're
gold--a young golden lady--if he touches you."

"I won't be touched!" she cried, relapsing into her habitual frivolity.

"Oh, but he'll touch you."

"He sha'n't!"

"He will."

"He sha'n't!"

"He will."

Miss Beaumont took up her Virgil and smacked Ford over the head with it.

"Evelyn! Evelyn!" said Mrs. Worters. "Now you are forgetting yourself.
And you also forget my question. What good has Latin done you?"

"Mr. Ford--what good has Latin done you?"

"Mr. Inskip--what good has Latin done us?"

So I was let in for the classical controversy. The arguments for the
study of Latin are perfectly sound, but they are difficult to remember,
and the afternoon sun was hot, and I needed my tea. But I had to justify
my existence as a coach, so I took off my eye-glasses and breathed on
them and said, "My dear Ford, what a question!"

"It's all right for Jack," said Mrs. Worters. "Jack has to pass his
entrance examination. But what's the good of it for Evelyn? None at
all."

"No, Mrs. Worters," I persisted, pointing my eye-glasses at her. "I
cannot agree. Miss Beaumont is--in a sense--new to our civilization. She
is entering it, and Latin is one of the subjects in her entrance
examination also. No one can grasp modern life without some knowledge of
its origins."

"But why should she grasp modern life?" said the tiresome woman.

"Well, there you are!" I retorted, and shut up my eye-glasses with a
snap.

"Mr. Inskip, I am not there. Kindly tell me what's the good of it all.
Oh, I've been through it myself: Jupiter, Venus, Juno, I know the lot of
them. And many of the stories not at all proper."

"Classical education," I said drily, "is not entirely confined to
classical mythology. Though even the mythology has its value. Dreams if
you like, but there is value in dreams."

"I too have dreams," said Mrs. Worters, "but I am not so foolish as to
mention them afterwards."

Mercifully we were interrupted. A rich virile voice close behind us
said, "Cherish your dreams!" We had been joined by our host, Harcourt
Worters--Mrs. Worters' son, Miss Beaumont's fiance. Ford's guardian, my
employer: I must speak of him as Mr. Worters.

"Let us cherish our dreams!" he repeated. "All day I've been fighting,
haggling, bargaining. And to come out on to this lawn and see you all
learning Latin, so happy, so passionless, so Arcadian----"

He did not finish the sentence, but sank into the chair next to Miss
Beaumont, and possessed himself of her hand. As he did so she sang: "Ah
yoù sílly àss góds lìve in woóds!"

"What have we here?" said Mr. Worters with a slight frown.

With the other hand she pointed to me.

"Virgil--" I stammered. "Colloquial translation----"

"Oh, I see; a colloquial translation of poetry." Then his smile
returned. "Perhaps if gods live in woods, that is why woods are so dear.
I have just bought Other Kingdom Copse!"

Loud exclamations of joy. Indeed, the beeches in that copse are as fine
as any in Hertfordshire. Moreover, it, and the meadow by which it is
approached, have always made an ugly notch in the rounded contours of
the Worters estate. So we were all very glad that Mr. Worters had
purchased Other Kingdom. Only Ford kept silent, stroking his head where
the Virgil had hit it, and smiling a little to himself as he did so.

"Judging from the price I paid, I should say there was a god in every
tree. But price, this time was no object." He glanced at Miss Beaumont.

"You admire beeches, Evelyn, do you not?"

"I forget always which they are. Like this?"

She flung her arms up above her head, close together, so that she looked
like a slender column. Then her body swayed and her delicate green dress
quivered over it with the suggestion of countless leaves.

"My dear child!" exclaimed her lover.

"No: that is a silver birch," said Ford,

"Oh, of course. Like this, then." And she twitched up her skirts so that
for a moment they spread out in great horizontal layers, like the layers
of a beech.

We glanced at the house, but none of the servants were looking. So we
laughed, and said she ought to go on the variety stage.

"Ah, this is the kind I like!" she cried, and practised the beech-tree
again.

"I thought so," said Mr. Worters. "I thought so. Other Kingdom Copse is
yours."

"Mine----?" She had never had such a present in her life. She could not
realize it.

"The purchase will be drawn up in your name. You will sign the deed.
Receive the wood, with my love. It is a second engagement ring."

"But is it--is it mine? Can I--do what I like there?"

"You can," said Mr. Worters, smiling.

She rushed at him and kissed him. She kissed Mrs. Worters. She would
have kissed myself and Ford if we had not extruded elbows. The joy of
possession had turned her head.

"It's mine! I can walk there, work there, live there. A wood of my own!
Mine for ever."

"Yours, at all events, for ninety-nine years."

"Ninety-nine years?" I regret to say there was a tinge of disappointment
in her voice.

"My dear child! Do you expect to live longer?"

"I suppose I can't," she replied, and flushed a little. "I don't know."

"Ninety-nine seems long enough to most people. I have got this house,
and the very lawn you are standing on, on a lease of ninety-nine years.
Yet I call them my own, and I think I am justified. Am I not?"

"Oh, yes."

"Ninety-nine years is practically for ever. Isn't it?"

"Oh, yes. It must be."

Ford possesses a most inflammatory note-book. Outside it is labelled
"Private," inside it is headed "Practically a book." I saw him make an
entry in it now, "Eternity: practically ninety-nine years."

Mr. Worters, as if speaking to himself, now observed: "My goodness! My
goodness! How land has risen! Perfectly astounding."

I saw that he was in need of a Boswell, so I said: "Has it, indeed?"

"My dear Inskip. Guess what I could have got that wood for ten years
ago! But I refused. Guess why."

We could not guess why.

"Because the transaction would not have been straight." A most becoming
blush spread over his face as he uttered the noble word. "Not straight.
Straight legally. But not morally straight. We were to force the hands
of the man who owned it. I refused. The others--decent fellows in their
way--told me I was squeamish. I said, 'Yes. Perhaps I am. My name is
plain Harcourt Worters--not a well-known name if you go outside the City
and my own country, but a name which, where it is known, carries, I
flatter myself, some weight. And I will not sign my name to this. That
is all. Call me squeamish if you like. But I will not sign. It is just a
fad of mine. Let us call it a fad.'" He blushed again. Ford believes
that his guardian blushes all over--if you could strip him and make him
talk nobly he would look like a boiled lobster. There is a picture of
him in this condition in the note-book.

"So the man who owned it then didn't own it now?" said Miss Beaumont,
who had followed the narrative with some interest.

"Oh, no!" said Mr. Worters.

"Why no!" said Mrs. Worters absently, as she hunted in the grass for her
knitting-needle. "Of course not. It belongs to the widow."

"Tea!" cried her son, springing vivaciously to his feet. "I see tea and
I want it. Come, mother. Come along, Evelyn. I can tell you it's no
joke, a hard day in the battle of life. For life is practically a
battle. To all intents and purposes a battle. Except for a few lucky
fellows who can read books, and so avoid the realities. But I----"

His voice died away as he escorted the two ladies over the smooth lawn
and up the stone steps to the terrace, on which the footman was placing
tables and little chairs and a silver kettle-stand. More ladies came out
of the house. We could just hear their shouts of excitement as they also
were told of the purchase of Other Kingdom.

I like Ford. The boy has the makings of a scholar and--though for some
reason he objects to the word--of a gentleman. It amused me now to see
his lip curl with the vague cynicism of youth. He cannot understand the
footman and the solid silver kettle-stand. They make him cross. For he
has dreams--not exactly spiritual dreams: Mr. Worters is the man for
those--but dreams of the tangible and the actual robust dreams, which
take him, not to heaven, but to another earth. There are no footmen in
this other earth, and the kettle-stands, I suppose, will not be made of
silver, and I know that everything is to be itself, and not practically
something else. But what this means, and, if it means anything, what the
good of it is, I am not prepared to say. For though I have just said
"there is value in dreams," I only said it to silence old Mrs. Worters.

"Go ahead, man! We can't have tea till we've got through something."

He turned his chair away from the terrace, so that he could sit looking
at the meadows and at the stream that runs through the meadows, and at
the beech-trees of Other Kingdom that rise beyond the stream. Then, most
gravely and admirably, he began to construe the Eclogues of Virgil.



II


Other Kingdom Copse is just like any other beech copse, and I am
therefore spared the fatigue of describing it. And the stream in front
of it, like many other streams, is not crossed by a bridge in the right
place, and you must either walk round a mile or else you must paddle.
Miss Beaumont suggested that we should paddle.

Mr. Worters accepted the suggestion tumultuously. It only became evident
gradually that he was not going to adopt it.

"What fun! what fun! We will paddle to your kingdom. If only--if only it
wasn't for the tea-things."

"But you can carry the tea-things on your back."

"Why, yes! so I can. Or the servants could,"

"Harcourt--no servants. This is my picnic, and my wood. I'm going to
settle everything. I didn't tell you: I've got all the food. I've been
in the village with Mr. Ford."

"In the village----?"

"Yes, We got biscuits and oranges and half a pound of tea. That's all
you'll have. He carried them up. And he'll carry them over the stream. I
want you just to lend me some tea-things--not the best ones. I'll take
care of them. That's all."

"Dear creature...."

"Evelyn," said Mrs. Worters, "how much did you and Jack pay for that
tea?"

"For the half-pound, tenpence."

Mrs. Worters received the announcement in gloomy silence.

"Mother!" cried Mr. Worters. "Why, I forgot! How could we go paddling
with mother?"

"Oh, but, Mrs. Worters, we could carry you over."

"Thank you, dearest child. I am sure you could."

"Alas! alas! Evelyn. Mother is laughing at us. She would sooner die than
be carried. And alas! there are my sisters, and Mrs. Osgood: she has a
cold, tiresome woman. No: we shall have to go round by the bridge."

"But some of us----" began Ford. His guardian cut him short with a quick
look.

So we went round--a procession of eight. Miss Beaumont led us. She was
full of fun--at least so I thought at the time, but when I reviewed her
speeches afterwards I could not find in them anything amusing. It was
all this kind of thing: "Single file! Pretend you're in church and don't
talk. Mr. Ford, turn out your toes. Harcourt--at the bridge throw to the
Naiad a pinch of tea. She has a headache. She has had a headache for
nineteen hundred years." All that she said was quite stupid. I cannot
think why I liked it at the time.

As we approached the copse she said, "Mr. Inskip, sing, and we'll sing
after you: Ah yoù silly àss góds lìve in woóds." I cleared my throat and
gave out the abominable phrase, and we all chanted it as if it were a
litany. There was something attractive about Miss Beaumont. I was not
surprised that Harcourt had picked her out of "Ireland" and had brought
her home, without money, without connections, almost without
antecedents, to be his bride. It was daring of him, but he knew himself
to be a daring fellow. She brought him nothing; but that he could
afford, he had so vast a surplus of spiritual and commercial goods. "In
time," I heard him tell his mother, "in time Evelyn will repay me a
thousandfold." Meanwhile there was something attractive about her. If it
were my place to like people, I could have liked her very much.

"Stop singing!" she cried. We had entered the wood. "Welcome, all of
you." We bowed. Ford, who had not been laughing, bowed down to the
ground. "And now be seated. Mrs. Worters--will you sit there--against
that tree with a green trunk? It will show up your beautiful dress."

"Very well, dear, I will," said Mrs. Worters.

"Anna--there. Mr. Inskip next to her. Then Ruth and Mrs. Osgood. Oh,
Harcourt--do sit a little forward, so that you'll hide the house. I
don't want to see the house at all."

"I won't!" laughed her lover, "I want my back against a tree, too."

"Miss Beaumont," asked Ford, "where shall I sit?" He was standing at
attention, like a soldier.

"Oh, look at all these Worters!" she cried, "and one little Ford in the
middle of them!" For she was at that state of civilization which
appreciates a pun.

"Shall I stand. Miss Beaumont? Shall I hide the house from you if I
stand?"

"Sit down. Jack, you baby!" cried his guardian, breaking in with
needless asperity. "Sit down!"

"He may just as well stand if he will," said she. "Just pull back your
soft hat, Mr. Ford. Like a halo. Now you hide even the smoke from the
chimneys. And it makes you look beautiful."

"Evelyn! Evelyn! You are too hard on the boy. You'll tire him. He's one
of those bookworms. He's not strong. Let him sit down."

"Aren't you strong?" she asked.

"I am strong!" he cried. It is quite true. Ford has no right to be
strong, but he is. He never did his dumb-bells or played in his school
fifteen. But the muscles came. He thinks they came while he was reading
Pindar.

"Then you may just as well stand, if you will."

"Evelyn! Evelyn! childish, selfish maiden! If poor Jack gets tired I
will take his place. Why don't you want to see the house? Eh?"

Mrs. Worters and the Miss Worters moved uneasily. They saw that their
Harcourt was not quite pleased. Theirs not to question why. It was for
Evelyn to remove his displeasure, and they glanced at her.

"Well, why don't you want to see your future home? I must say--though I
practically planned the house myself--that it looks very well from here.
I like the gables. Miss! Answer me!"

I felt for Miss Beaumont. A home-made gable is an awful thing, and
Harcourt's mansion looked like a cottage with the dropsy. But what would
she say?

She said nothing.

"Well?"

It was as if he had never spoken. She was as merry, as smiling, as
pretty as ever, and she said nothing. She had not realized that a
question requires an answer.

For us the situation was intolerable. I had to save it by making a
tactful reference to the view, which, I said, reminded me a little of
the country near Veii. It did not--indeed it could not, for I have never
been near Veii. But it is part of my system to make classical allusions.
And at all events I saved the situation.

Miss Beaumont was serious and rational at once. She asked me the date of
Veii. I made a suitable answer.

"I do like the classics," she informed us. "They are so natural. Just
writing down things."

"Ye--es," said I. "But the classics have their poetry as well as their
prose. They're more than a record of facts."

"Just writing down things," said Miss Beaumont, and smiled as if the
silly definition pleased her.

Harcourt had recovered himself. "A very just criticism," said he. "It is
what I always feel about the ancient world. It takes us but a very
little way. It only writes things down."

"What do you mean?" asked Evelyn.

"I mean this--though it is presumptuous to speak in the presence of Mr.
Inskip. This is what I mean. The classics are not everything. We owe
them an enormous debt; I am the last to undervalue it; I, too, went
through them at school. They are full of elegance and beauty. But they
are not everything. They were written before men began to really feel."
He coloured crimson. "Hence, the chilliness of classical art--its lack
of--of a something. Whereas later things--Dante--a Madonna of
Raphael--some bars of Mendelssohn----" His voice tailed reverently away.
We sat with our eyes on the ground, not liking to look at Miss Beaumont.
It is a fairly open secret that she also lacks a something. She has not
yet developed her soul.

The silence was broken by the still small voice of Mrs. Worters saying
that she was faint with hunger.

The young hostess sprang up. She would let none of us help her: it was
her party. She undid the basket and emptied out the biscuits and oranges
from their bags, and boiled the kettle and poured out the tea, which was
horrible. But we laughed and talked with the frivolity that suits the
open air, and even Mrs. Worters expectorated her flies with a smile.
Over us all there stood the silent, chivalrous figure of Ford, drinking
tea carefully lest it should disturb his outline. His guardian, who is a
wag, chaffed him and tickled his ankles and calves.

"Well, this is nice!" said Miss Beaumont. "I am happy."

"Your wood, Evelyn!" said the ladies.

"Her wood for ever!" cried Mr. Worters. "It is an unsatisfactory
arrangement, a ninety-nine years' lease. There is no feeling of
permanency. I reopened negotiations. I have bought her the wood for
ever--all right, dear, all right: don't make a fuss."

"But I must!" she cried. "For everything's perfect! Every one so
kind--and I didn't know most of you a year ago. Oh, it is so
wonderful--and now a wood--a wood of my own--a wood for ever. All of you
coming to tea with me here! Dear Harcourt--dear people--and just where
the house would come and spoil things, there is Mr. Ford!"

"Ha! ha!" laughed Mr. Worters, and slipped his hand up round the boy's
ankle. What happened I do not know, but Ford collapsed on to the ground
with a sharp cry. To an outsider it might have sounded like a cry of
anger or pain. We, who knew better, laughed uproariously.

"Down he goes! Down he goes!" And they struggled playfully, kicking up
the mould and the dry leaves.

"Don't hurt my wood!" cried Miss Beaumont.

Ford gave another sharp cry. Mr. Worters withdrew his hand. "Victory!"
he exclaimed. "Evelyn! behold the family seat!" But Miss Beaumont, in
her butterfly fashion, had left us, and was strolling away into her
wood.

We packed up the tea-things and then split into groups. Ford went with
the ladies. Mr. Worters did me the honour to stop by me.

"Well!" he said, in accordance with his usual formula, "and how go the
classics?"

"Fairly well."

"Does Miss Beaumont show any ability?"

"I should say that she does. At all events she has enthusiasm."

"You do not think it is the enthusiasm of a child? I will be frank with
you, Mr. Inskip. In many ways Miss Beaumont's practically a child. She
has everything to learn: she acknowledges as much herself. Her new life
is so different--so strange. Our habits--our thoughts--she has to be
initiated into them all."

I saw what he was driving at, but I am not a fool, and I replied: "And
how can she be initiated better than through the classics?"

"Exactly, exactly," said Mr. Worters. In the distance we heard her
voice. She was counting the beech-trees. "The only question is--this
Latin and Greek--what will she do with it? Can she make anything of it?
Can she--well, it's not as if she will ever have to teach it to
others."

"That is true." And my features might have been observed to become
undecided.

"Whether, since she knows so little--I grant you she has enthusiasm. But
ought one not to divert her enthusiasm--say to English literature? She
scarcely knows her Tennyson at all. Last night in the conservatory I
read her that wonderful scene between Arthur and Guinevere. Greek and
Latin are all very well, but I sometimes feel we ought to begin at the
beginning."

"You feel," said I, "that for Miss Beaumont the classics are something
of a luxury."

"A luxury. That is the exact word, Mr. Inskip. A luxury. A whim. It is
all very well for Jack Ford. And here we come to another point. Surely
she keeps Jack back? Her knowledge must be elementary."

"Well, her knowledge _is_ elementary: and I must say that it's
difficult to teach them together. Jack has read a good deal, one way and
another, whereas Miss Beaumont, though diligent and enthusiastic----"

"So I have been feeling. The arrangement is scarcely fair on Jack?"

"Well, I must admit----"

"Quite so. I ought never to have suggested it. It must come to an end.
Of course, Mr. Inskip, it shall make no difference to you, this
withdrawal of a pupil."

"The lessons shall cease at once, Mr. Worters."

Here she came up to us. "Harcourt, there are seventy-eight trees. I have
had such a count."

He smiled down at her. Let me remember to say that he is tall and
handsome, with a strong chin and liquid brown eyes, and a high forehead
and hair not at all gray. Few things are more striking than a photograph
of Mr. Harcourt Worters.

"Seventy-eight trees?"

"Seventy-eight."

"Are you pleased?"

"Oh, Harcourt----!"

I began to pack up the tea-things. They both saw and heard me. It was
their own fault if they did not go further.

"I'm looking forward to the bridge," said he. "A rustic bridge at the
bottom, and then, perhaps, an asphalt path from the house over the
meadow, so that in all weathers we can walk here dry-shod. The boys come
into the wood--look at all these initials--and I thought of putting a
simple fence, to prevent any one but ourselves----"

"Harcourt!"

"A simple fence," he continued, "just like what I have put round my
garden and the fields. Then at the other side of the copse, away from
the house, I would put a gate, and have keys--two keys, I think--one for
me and one for you--not more; and I would bring the asphalt path----"

"But Harcourt-----"

"But Evelyn!"

"I--I--I----"

"You--you--you----?"

"I--I don't want an asphalt path."

"No? Perhaps you are right. Cinders perhaps. Yes. Or even gravel."

"But Harcourt--I don't want a path at all. I--I--can't afford a path."

He gave a roar of triumphant laughter. "Dearest! As if you were going to
be bothered? The path's part of my present."

"The wood is your present," said Miss Beaumont. "Do you know--I don't
care for the path. I'd rather always come as we came to-day. And I don't
want a bridge. No--nor a fence either. I don't mind the boys and their
initials. They and the girls have always come up to Other Kingdom and
cut their names together in the bark. It's called the Fourth Time of
Asking. I don't want it to stop."

"Ugh!" He pointed to a large heart transfixed by an arrow. "Ugh! Ugh!" I
suspect that he was gaining time.

"They cut their names and go away, and when the first child is born they
come again and deepen the cuts. So for each child. That's how you know:
the initials that go right through to the wood are the fathers and
mothers of large families, and the scratches in the bark that soon close
up are boys and girls who were never married at all."

"You wonderful person! I've lived here all my life and never heard a
word of this. Fancy folk-lore in Hertfordshire! I must tell the
Archdeacon: he will be delighted----"

"And Harcourt, I don't want this to stop."

"My dear girl, the villagers will find other trees! There's nothing
particular in Other Kingdom."

"But----"

"Other Kingdom shall be for us. You and I alone. Our initials only." His
voice sank to a whisper.

"I don't want it fenced in." Her face was turned to me; I saw that it
was puzzled and frightened. "I hate fences. And bridges. And all paths.
It is my wood. Please: you gave me the wood."

"Why, yes!" he replied, soothing her. But I could see that he was angry.
"Of course. But aha! Evelyn, the meadow's mine; I have a right to fence
there--between my domain and yours!"

"Oh, fence me out if you like! Fence me out as much as you like! But
never in. Oh Harcourt, never in. I must be on the outside, I must be
where any one can reach me. Year by year--while the initials deepen--the
only thing worth feeling--and at last they close up--but one has felt
them."

"Our initials!" he murmured, seizing upon the one word which he had
understood and which was useful to him. "Let us carve our initials now.
You and I--a heart if you like it, and an arrow and everything.
H.W.--E.B."

"H.W.," she repeated, "and E.B."

He took out his penknife and drew her away in search of an unsullied
tree. "E.B., Eternal Blessing. Mine! Mine! My haven from the world! My
temple of purity. Oh the spiritual exaltation--you cannot understand it,
but you will! Oh, the seclusion of Paradise. Year after year alone
together, all in all to each other--year after year, soul to soul, E.B.,
Everlasting Bliss!"

He stretched out his hand to cut the initials. As he did so she seemed
to awake from a dream. "Harcourt!" she cried, "Harcourt! What's that?
What's that red stuff on your finger and thumb?"



III


Oh, my goodness! Oh, all ye goddesses and gods! Here's a mess. Mr.
Worters has been reading Ford's inflammatory note-book.

"This my own fault," said Ford. "I should have labelled it 'Practically
Private.' How could he know he was not meant to look inside?"

I spoke out severely, as an _employé_ should. "My dear boy, none of
that. The label came unstuck. That was why Mr. Worters opened the book.
He never suspected it was private. See--the label's off."

"Scratched off," Ford retorted grimly, and glanced at his ankle.

I affect not to understand. "The point is this. Mr. Worters is thinking
the matter over for four-and-twenty hours. If you take my advice you
will apologize before that time elapses."

"And if I don't?"

"You know your own affairs of course. But don't forget that you are
young and practically ignorant of life, and that you have scarcely any
money of your own. As far as I can see, your career practically depends
on the favour of Mr. Worters. You have laughed at him. He does not like
being laughed at. It seems to me that your course is obvious."

"Apology?"

"Complete."

"And if I don't?"

"Departure."

He sat down on the stone steps and rested his head on his knees. On the
lawn below us was Miss Beaumont, draggling about with some croquet
balls. Her lover was out in the meadow, superintending the course of the
asphalt path. For the path is to be made, and so is the bridge, and the
fence is to be built round Other Kingdom after all. In time Miss
Beaumont saw how unreasonable were her objections. Of her own accord,
one evening in the drawing-room, she gave her Harcourt permission to do
what he liked. "That wood looks nearer," said Ford.

"The inside fences have gone: that brings it nearer. But my dear
boy--you must settle what you're going to do."

"How much has he read?"

"Naturally he only opened the book. From what you showed me of it, one
glance would be enough."

"Did he open at the poems?"

"Poems?"

"Did he speak of the poems?"

"No. Were they about him?"

"They were not about him."

"Then it wouldn't matter if he saw them."

"It is sometimes a compliment to be mentioned," said Ford, looking up at
me. The remark had a stinging fragrance about it--such a fragrance as
clings to the mouth after admirable wine. It did not taste like the
remark of a boy. I was sorry that my pupil was likely to wreck his
career; and I told him again that he had better apologize.

"I won't speak of Mr. Worters' claim for an apology. That's an aspect
on which I prefer not to touch. The point is, if you don't apologize,
you go--where?"

"To an aunt at Peckham."

I pointed to the pleasant, comfortable land-scape, full of cows and
carriage-horses out at grass, and civil retainers. In the midst of it
stood Mr. Worters, radiating energy and wealth, like a terrestrial sun.
"My dear Ford--don't be heroic! Apologize."

Unfortunately I raised my voice a little, and Miss Beaumont heard me,
down on the lawn.

"Apologize?" she cried. "What about?" And as she was not interested in
the game, she came up the steps towards us, trailing her croquet mallet
behind her. Her walk was rather listless. She was toning down at last.

"Come indoors!" I whispered. "We must get out of this."

"Not a bit of it!" said Ford.

"What is it?" she asked, standing beside him on the step.

He swallowed something as he looked up at her. Suddenly I understood. I
knew the nature and the subject of his poems. I was not so sure now that
he had better apologize. The sooner he was kicked out of the place the
better.

In spite of my remonstrances, he told her about the book, and her first
remark was: "Oh, do let me see it!" She had no "proper feeling" of any
kind. Then she said: "But why do you both look so sad?"

"We are awaiting Mr. Worters' decision," said I.

"Mr. Inskip! What nonsense! Do you suppose Harcourt'll be angry?"

"Of course he is angry, and rightly so."

"But why?"

"Ford has laughed at him."

"But what's that!" And for the first time there was anger in her voice.
"Do you mean to say he'll punish some one who laughs at him? Why, for
what else--for whatever reason are we all here? Not to laugh at each
other! I laugh at people all day. At Mr. Ford. At you. And so does
Harcourt. Oh, you've misjudged him! He won't--he couldn't be angry with
people who laughed."

"Mine is not nice laughter," said Ford. "He could not well forgive me."

"You're a silly boy." She sneered at him. "You don't know Harcourt. So
generous in every way. Why, he'd be as furious as I should be if you
apologized. Mr. Inskip, isn't that so?"

"He has every right to an apology, I think."

"Right? What's a right? You use too many new words.
'Rights'--'apologies'--'society'--'position'--I don't follow it. What
are we all here for, anyhow?"

Her discourse was full of trembling lights and shadows--frivolous one
moment, the next moment asking why Humanity is here. I did not take the
Moral Science Tripos, so I could not tell her.

"One thing I know--and that is that Harcourt isn't as stupid as you two.
He soars above conventions. He doesn't care about 'rights' and
'apologies.' He knows that all laughter is nice, and that the other nice
things are money and the soul and so on."

The soul and so on! I wonder that Harcourt out in the meadows did not
have an apoplectic fit.

"Why, what a poor business your life would be," she continued, "if you
all kept taking offence and apologizing! Forty million people in England
and all of them touchy! How one would laugh if it was true! Just
imagine!" And she did laugh. "Look at Harcourt though. He knows better.
He isn't petty like that. Mr. Ford! He isn't petty like that. Why, what
's wrong with your eyes?"

He rested his head on his knees again, and we could see his eyes no
longer. In dispassionate tones she informed me that she thought he was
crying. Then she tapped him on the hair with her mallet and said:
"Cry-baby! Cry-cry-baby! Crying about nothing!" and ran laughing down
the steps. "All right!" she shouted from the lawn. "Tell the cry-baby to
stop. I'm going to speak to Harcourt!"

We watched her go in silence. Ford had scarcely been crying. His eyes
had only become large and angry. He used such swear-words as he knew,
and then got up abruptly, and went into the house. I think he could not
bear to see her disillusioned. I had no such tenderness, and it was with
considerable interest that I watched Miss Beaumont approach her lord.

She walked confidently across the meadow, bowing to the workmen as they
raised their hats. Her languor had passed, and with it her suggestion of
"tone." She was the same crude, unsophisticated person that Harcourt had
picked out of Ireland--beautiful and ludicrous in the extreme, and:--if
you go in for pathos--extremely pathetic.

I saw them meet, and soon she was hanging on his arm. The motion of his
hand explained to her the construction of bridges. Twice she interrupted
him: he had to explain everything again. Then she got in her word, and
what followed was a good deal better than a play. Their two little
figures parted and met and parted again, she gesticulating, he most
pompous and calm. She pleaded, she argued and--if satire can carry half
a mile--she tried to be satirical. To enforce one of her childish points
she made two steps back. Splash! She was floundering in the little
stream.

That was the _dénouement_ of the comedy. Harcourt rescued her, while the
workmen crowded round in an agitated chorus. She was wet quite as far as
her knees, and muddy over her ankles. In this state she was conduced
towards me, and in time I began to hear words; "Influenza--a slight
immersion--clothes are of no consequence beside health--pray, dearest,
don't worry--yes, it must have been a shock--bed! bed! I insist on bed!
Promise? Good girl. Up the steps to bed then."

They parted on the lawn, and she came obediently up the steps. Her face
was full of terror and bewilderment.

"So you've had a wetting, Miss Beaumont!"

"Wetting? Oh, yes. But, Mr. Inskip--I don't understand: I've failed."

I expressed surprise.

"Mr. Ford is to go--at once. I've failed."

"I'm sorry."

"I've failed with Harcourt. He's offended. He won't laugh. He won't let
me do what I want. Latin and Greek began it: I wanted to know about gods
and heroes and he wouldn't let me: then I wanted no fence round Other
Kingdom and no bridge and no path--and look! Now I ask that Mr. Ford,
who has done nothing, sha'n't be punished for it--and he is to go away
for ever."

"Impertinence is not 'nothing,' Miss Beaumont." For I must keep in with
Harcourt.

"Impertinence is nothing!" she cried. "It doesn't exist. It's a sham,
like 'claims' and 'position' and 'rights.' It's part of the great
dream."

"What 'great dream'?" I asked, trying not to smile.

"Tell Mr. Ford--here comes Harcourt; I must go to bed. Give my love to
Mr. Ford, and tell him 'to guess.' I shall never see him again, and I
won't stand it. Tell him to guess. I am sorry I called him a cry-baby.
He was not crying like a baby. He was crying like a grown-up person, and
now I have grown up too."

I judged it right to repeat this conversation to my employer.



IV


The bridge is built, the fence finished, and Other Kingdom lies tethered
by a ribbon of asphalt to our front door. The seventy-eight trees
therein certainly seem nearer, and during the windy nights that followed
Ford's departure we could hear their branches sighing, and would find in
the morning that beech-leaves had been blown right up against the house.
Miss Beaumont made no attempt to go out, much to the relief of the
ladies, for Harcourt had given the word that she was not to go out
unattended, and the boisterous weather deranged their petticoats. She
remained indoors, neither reading nor laughing, and dressing no longer
in green, but in brown.

Not noticing her presence, Mr. Worters looked in one day and said with a
sigh of relief: "That's all right. The circle's completed."

"Is it indeed!" she replied.

"You there, you quiet little mouse? I only meant that our lords, the
British workmen, have at last condescended to complete their labours,
and have rounded us off from the world. I--in the end I was a naughty,
domineering tyrant, and disobeyed you. I didn't have the gate out at the
further side of the copse. Will you forgive me?"

"Anything, Harcourt, that pleases you, is certain to please me."

The ladies smiled at each other, and Mr. Worters said: "That's right,
and as soon as the wind goes down we'll all progress together to your
wood; and take possession of it formally, for it didn't really count
that last time."

"No, it didn't really count that last time," Miss Beaumont echoed.

"Evelyn says this wind never will go down," remarked Mrs. Worters. "I
don't know how she knows."

"It will never go down, as long as I am in the house."

"Really?" he said gaily. "Then come out now, and send it down with me."

They took a few turns up and down the terrace. The wind lulled for a
moment, but blew fiercer than ever during lunch. As we ate, it roared
and whistled down the chimney at us, and the trees of Other Kingdom
frothed like the sea. Leaves and twigs flew from them, and a bough, a
good-sized bough, was blown on to the smooth asphalt path, and actually
switchbacked over the bridge, up the meadow, and across our very lawn.
(I venture to say "our," as I am now staying on as Harcourt's
secretary.) Only the stone steps prevented it from reaching the terrace
and perhaps breaking the dining-room window. Miss Beaumont sprang up
and, napkin in hand, ran out and touched it.

"Oh, Evelyn----" the ladies cried.

"Let her go," said Mr. Worters tolerantly. "It certainly is a remarkable
incident, remarkable. We must remember to tell the Archdeacon about it."

"Harcourt," she cried, with the first hint of returning colour in her
cheeks, "mightn't we go up to the copse after lunch, you and I?"

Mr. Worters considered.

"Of course, not if you don't think best."

"Inskip, what's your opinion?"

I saw what his own was, and cried, "Oh, let's go!" though I detest the
wind as much as any one.

"Very well. Mother, Anna, Ruth, Mrs. Osgood--we'll all go."

And go we did, a lugubrious procession; but the gods were good to us for
once, for as soon as we were started, the tempest dropped, and there
ensued an extraordinary calm. After all, Miss Beaumont was something of
a weather prophet. Her spirits improved every minute. She tripped in
front of us along the asphalt path, and ever and anon turned round to
say to her lover some gracious or alluring thing. I admired her for it.
I admire people who know on which side their bread's buttered.

"Evelyn, come here!"

"Come here yourself."

"Give me a kiss."

"Come and take it then."

He ran after her, and she ran away, while all our party laughed
melodiously.

"Oh, I am so happy!" she cried. "I think I've everything I want in all
the world. Oh dear, those last few days indoors! But oh, I am so happy
now!" She had changed her brown dress for the old flowing green one, and
she began to do her skirt dance in the open meadow, lit by sudden gleams
of the sunshine. It was really a beautiful sight, and Mr. Worters did
not correct her, glad perhaps that she should recover her spirits, even
if she lost her tone. Her feet scarcely moved, but her body so swayed
and her dress spread so gloriously around her, that we were transported
with joy. She danced to the song of a bird that sang passionately in
Other Kingdom, and the river held back its waves to watch her (one might
have supposed), and the winds lay spell-bound in their cavern, and the
great clouds spell-bound in the sky. She danced away from our society
and our life, back, back through the centuries till houses and fences
fell and the earth lay wild to the sun. Her garment was as foliage upon
her, the strength of her limbs as boughs, her throat the smooth upper
branch that salutes the morning or glistens to the rain. Leaves move,
leaves hide it as hers was hidden by the motion of her hair. Leaves move
again and it is ours, as her throat was ours again when, parting the
tangle, she faced us crying, "Oh!" crying, "Oh Harcourt! I never was so
happy. I have all that there is in the world."

But he, entrammelled in love's ecstasy, forgetting certain Madonnas of
Raphael, forgetting, I fancy, his soul, sprang to inarm her with,
"Evelyn! Eternal Bliss! Mine to eternity! Mine!" and she sprang away.
Music was added and she sang, "Oh Ford! oh Ford, among all these
Worters, I am coming through you to my Kingdom. Oh Ford, my lover while
I was a woman, I will never forget you, never, as long as I have
branches to shade you from the sun," and, singing, crossed the stream.

Why he followed her so passionately, I do not know. It was play, she was
in his own domain which a fence surrounds, and she could not possibly
escape him. But he dashed round by the bridge as if all their love was
at stake, and pursued her with fierceness up the hill. She ran well, but
the end was a foregone conclusion, and we only speculated whether he
would catch her outside or inside the copse. He gained on her inch by
inch; now they were in the shadow of the trees; he had practically
grasped her, he had missed; she had disappeared into the trees
themselves, he following.

"Harcourt is in high spirits," said Mrs. Osgood, Anna, and Ruth.

"Evelyn!" we heard him shouting within.

We proceeded up the asphalt path.

"Evelyn! Evelyn!"

"He's not caught her yet, evidently."

"Where are you, Evelyn?"

"Miss Beaumont must have hidden herself rather cleverly."

"Look here," cried Harcourt, emerging, "have you seen Evelyn?"

"Oh, no, she's certainly inside."

"So I thought."

"Evelyn must be dodging round one of the trunks. You go this way, I
that. We'll soon find her."

We searched, gaily at first, and always with a feeling that Miss
Beaumont was close by, that the delicate limbs were just behind this
bole, the hair and the drapery quivering among those leaves. She was
beside us, above us; here was her footstep on the purple-brown
earth--her bosom, her neck--she was everywhere and nowhere. Gaiety
turned to irritation, irritation to anger and fear. Miss Beaumont was
apparently lost. "Evelyn! Evelyn!" we continued to cry. "Oh, really, it
is beyond a joke."

Then the wind arose, the more violent for its lull, and we were driven
into the house by a terrific storm. We said, "At all events she will
come back now." But she did not come, and the rain hissed and rose up
from the dry meadows like incense smoke, and smote the quivering leaves
to applause. Then it lightened. Ladies screamed, and we saw Other
Kingdom as one who claps the handsy and heard it as one who roars with
laughter in the thunder. Not even the Archdeacon can remember such a
storm. All Harcourt's seedlings were ruined, and the tiles flew off his
gables right and left. He came to me presently with a white, drawn face,
saying: "Inskip, can I trust you?"

"You can, indeed."

"I have long suspected it; she has eloped with Ford."

"But how----" I gasped.

"The carriage is ready--we'll talk as we drive." Then, against the rain
he shouted: "No gate in the fence, I know, but what about a ladder?
While I blunder, she's over the fence, and he----"

"But you were so close. There was not the time."

"There is time for anything," he said venomously, "where a treacherous
woman is concerned. I found her no better than a savage, I trained her,
I educated her. But I'll break them both. I can do that; I'll break them
soul and body."

No one can break Ford now. The task is impossible. But I trembled for
Miss Beaumont.

We missed the train. Young couples had gone by it, several young
couples, and we heard of more young couples in London, as if all the
world were mocking Harcourt's solitude. In desperation we sought the
squalid suburb that is now Ford's home. We swept past the dirty maid and
the terrified aunt, swept upstairs, to catch him if we could red-handed.
He was seated at the table, reading the _Oedipus Coloneus_ of Sophocles.

"That won't take in me!" shouted Harcourt. "You've got Miss Beaumont
with you, and I know it."

"No such luck," said Ford.

He stammered with rage. "Inskip--you hear that? 'No such luck'! Quote
the evidence against him. I can't speak."

So I quoted her song. "'Oh Ford! Oh Ford, among all these Worters, I am
coming through you to my Kingdom! Oh Ford, my lover while I was a woman,
I will never forget you, never, as long as I have branches to shade you
from the sun.' Soon after that, we lost her."

"And--and on another occasion she sent a message of similar effect.
Inskip, bear witness. He was to 'guess' something."

"I have guessed it," said Ford.

"So you practically----"

"Oh, no, Mr. Worters, you mistake me. I have not practically guessed. I
have guessed. I could tell you if I chose, but it would be no good, for
she has not practically escaped you. She has escaped you absolutely, for
ever and ever, as long as there are branches to shade men from the sun."




THE CURATE'S FRIEND


It is uncertain how the Faun came to be in Wiltshire. Perhaps he came
over with the Roman legionaries to live with his friends in camp,
talking to them of Lucretius, or Garganus or of the slopes of Etna; they
in the joy of their recall forgot to take him on board, and he wept in
exile; but at last he found that our hills also understood his sorrows,
and rejoiced when he was happy. Or, perhaps he came to be there because
he had been there always. There is nothing particularly classical about
a faun: it is only that the Greeks and Italians have ever had the
sharpest eyes. You will find him in the "Tempest" and the "Benedicite;"
and any country which has beech clumps and sloping grass and very clear
streams may reasonably produce him.

How I came to see him is a more difficult question. For to see him there
is required a certain quality, for which truthfulness is too cold a name
and animal spirits too coarse a one, and he alone knows how this quality
came to be in me. No man has the right to call himself a fool, but I may
say that I then presented the perfect semblance of one. I was facetious
without humour and serious without conviction. Every Sunday I would
speak to my rural parishioners about the other world in the tone of one
who has been behind the scenes, or I would explain to them the errors of
the Pelagians, or I would warn them against hurrying from one
dissipation to another. Every Tuesday I gave what I called "straight
talks to my lads"--talks which led straight past anything awkward. And
every Thursday I addressed the Mothers' Union on the duties of wives or
widows, and gave them practical hints on the management of a family of
ten.

I took myself in, and for a time I certainly took in Emily. I have never
known a girl attend so carefully to my sermons, or laugh so heartily at
my jokes. It is no wonder that I became engaged. She has made an
excellent wife, freely correcting her husband's absurdities, but
allowing no one else to breathe a word against them; able to talk about
the sub-conscious self in the drawing-room, and yet have an ear for the
children crying in the nursery, or the plates breaking in the scullery.
An excellent wife--better than I ever imagined. But she has not married
me.

Had we stopped indoors that afternoon nothing thing would have happened.
It was all owing to Emily's mother, who insisted on our tea-ing out.
Opposite the village, across the stream, was a small chalk down, crowned
by a beech copse, and a few Roman earth-works. (I lectured very vividly
on those earthworks: they have since proved to be Saxon). Hither did I
drag up a tea-basket and a heavy rug for Emily's mother, while Emily and
a little friend went on in front. The little friend--who has played all
through a much less important part than he supposes--was a pleasant
youth, full of intelligence and poetry, especially of what he called the
poetry of earth. He longed to wrest earth's secret from her, and I have
seen him press his face passionately into the grass, even when he has
believed himself to be alone. Emily was at that time full of vague
aspirations, and, though I should have preferred them all to centre in
me, yet it seemed unreasonable to deny her such other opportunities for
self-culture as the neighbourhood provided.

It was then my habit, on reaching the top of any eminence, to exclaim
facetiously "And who will stand on either hand and keep the bridge with
me?" at the same moment violently agitating my arms or casting my
wide-awake eyes at an imaginary foe. Emily and the friend received my
sally as usual, nor could I detect any insincerity in their mirth. Yet I
was convinced that some one was present who did not think I had been
funny, and any public speaker will understand my growing uneasiness.

I was somewhat cheered by Emily's mother, who puffed up exclaiming,
"Kind Harry, to carry the things! What should we do without you, even
now! Oh, what a view! Can you see the dear Cathedral? No. Too hazy. Now
_I'm_ going to sit _right_ on the rug." She smiled mysteriously. "The
downs in September, you know."

We gave some perfunctory admiration to the landscape, which is indeed
only beautiful to those who admire land, and to them perhaps the most
beautiful in England. For here is the body of the great chalk spider who
straddles over our island--whose legs are the south downs and the north
downs and the Chilterns, and the tips of whose toes poke out at Cromer
and Dover. He is a clean creature, who grows as few trees as he can, and
those few in tidy clumps, and he loves to be tickled by quickly flowing
streams. He is pimpled all over with earth-works, for from the beginning
of time men have fought for the privilege of standing on him, and the
oldest of our temples is built upon his back.

But in those days I liked my country snug and pretty, full of
gentlemen's residences and shady bowers and people who touch their hats.
The great sombre expanses on which one may walk for miles and hardly
shift a landmark or meet a genteel person were still intolerable to me.
I turned away as soon as propriety allowed and said "And may I now
prepare the cup that cheers?"

Emily's mother replied: "Kind man, to help me. I always do say that tea
out is worth the extra effort. I wish we led simpler lives." We agreed
with her. I spread out the food. "Won't the kettle stand? Oh, but _make_
it stand." I did so. There was a little cry, faint but distinct, as of
something in pain.

"How silent it all is up here!" said Emily.

I dropped a lighted match on the grass, and again I heard the little
cry.

"What is that?" I asked.

"I only said it was so silent," said Emily.

"Silent, indeed," echoed the little friend.

Silent! the place was full of noises. If the match had fallen in a
drawing-room it could not have been worse, and the loudest noise came
from beside Emily herself. I had exactly the sensation of going to a
great party, of waiting to be announced in the echoing hall, where I
could hear the voices of the guests, but could not yet see their faces.
It is a nervous moment for a self-conscious man, especially if all the
voices should be strange to him, and he has never met his host.

"My dear Harry!" said the elder lady, "never mind about that match.
That'll smoulder away and harm no one. Tea-ee-ee! I always say--and you
will find Emily the same--that as the magic hour of five approaches, no
matter how good a lunch, one begins to feel a sort of----"

Now the Faun is of the kind who capers upon the Neo-Attic reliefs, and
if you do not notice his ears or see his tail, you take him for a man
and are horrified.

"Bathing!" I cried wildly. "Such a thing for our village lads, but I
quite agree--more supervision--I blame myself. Go away, bad boy, go
away!"

"What will he think of next!" said Emily, while the creature beside her
stood up and beckoned to me. I advanced struggling and gesticulating
with tiny steps and horrified cries, exorcising the apparition with my
hat. Not otherwise had I advanced the day before, when Emily's nieces
showed me their guinea pigs. And by no less hearty laughter was I
greeted now. Until the strange fingers closed upon me, I still thought
that here was one of my parishioners and did not cease to exclaim, "Let
me go, naughty boy, let go!" And Emily's mother, believing herself to
have detected the joke, replied, "Well I must confess they are naughty
boys and reach one even on the rug: the downs in September, as I said
before."

Here I caught sight of the tail, uttered a wild shriek and fled into the
beech copse behind.

"Harry would have been a born actor," said Emily's mother as I left
them.

I realized that a great crisis in my life was approaching, and that if I
failed in it I might permanently lose my self-esteem. Already in the
wood I was troubled by a multitude of voices--the voices of the hill
beneath me, of the trees over my head, of the very insects in the bark
of the tree. I could even hear the stream licking little pieces out of
the meadows, and the meadows dreamily protesting. Above the din--which
is no louder than the flight of a bee--rose the Faun's voice saying,
"Dear priest, be placid, be placid: why are you frightened?"

"I am not frightened," said I--and indeed I was not. "But I am grieved:
you have disgraced me in the presence of ladies."

"No one else has seen me," he said, smiling idly. "The women have tight
boots and the man has long hair. Those kinds never see. For years I have
only spoken to children, and they lose sight of me as soon as they grow
up. But you will not be able to lose sight of me, and until you die you
will be my friend. Now I begin to make you happy: lie upon your back or
run races, or climb trees, or shall I get you blackberries, or
harebells, or wives----"

In a terrible voice I said to him, "Get thee behind me!" He got behind
me. "Once for all," I continued, "let me tell you that it is vain to
tempt one whose happiness consists in giving happiness to others."

"I cannot understand you," he said ruefully. "What is to tempt?"

"Poor woodland creature!" said I, turning round. "How could you
understand? It was idle of me to chide you. It is not in your little
nature to comprehend a life of self-denial. Ah! if only I could reach
you!"

"You have reached him," said the hill.

"If only I could touch you!"

"You have touched him," said the hill.

"But I will never leave you," burst out the Faun. "I will sweep out your
shrine for you, I will accompany you to the meetings of matrons. I will
enrich you at the bazaars."

I shook my head. "For these things I care not at all. And indeed I was
minded to reject your offer of service altogether. There I was wrong.
You shall help me--you shall help me to make others happy."

"Dear priest, what a curious life! People whom I have never
seen--people who cannot see me--why should I make them happy?"

"My poor lad--perhaps in time you will learn why. Now begone: commence.
On this very hill sits a young lady for whom I have a high regard.
Commence with her. Aha! your face falls. I thought as much. You _cannot_
do anything. Here is the conclusion of the whole matter!"

"I can make her happy," he replied, "if you order me; and when I have
done so, perhaps you will trust me more."

Emily's mother had started home, but Emily and the little friend still
sat beside the tea-things--she in her white piqué dress and biscuit
straw, he in his rough but well-cut summer suit. The great pagan figure
of the Faun towered insolently above them.

The friend was saying, "And have you never felt the appalling loneliness
of a crowd?"

"All that," replied Emily, "have I felt, and very much more--"

Then the Faun laid his hands upon them. They, who had only intended a
little cultured flirtation, resisted him as long as they could, but were
gradually urged into each other's arms, and embraced with passion.

"Miscreant!" I shouted, bursting from the wood. "You have betrayed me."

"I know it: I care not," cried the little friend. "Stand aside. You are
in the presence of that which you do not understand. In the great
solitude we have found ourselves at last."

"Remove your accursed hands!" I shrieked to the Faun.

He obeyed and the little friend continued more calmly: "It is idle to
chide. What should you know, poor clerical creature, of the mystery of
love of the eternal man and the eternal woman, of the self-effectuation
of a soul?"

"That is true," said Emily angrily. "Harry, you would never have made me
happy. I shall treat you as a friend, but how could I give myself to a
man who makes such silly jokes? When you played the buffoon at tea, your
hour was sealed. I must be treated seriously: I must see infinities
broadening around me as I rise. You may not approve of it, but so I am.
In the great solitude I have found myself at last."

"Wretched girl!" I cried. "Great solitude! O pair of helpless
puppets----"

The little friend began to lead Emily away, but I heard her whisper to
him: "Dear, we can't possibly leave the basket for Harry after this: and
mother's rug; do you mind having that in the other hand?"

So they departed and I flung myself upon the ground with every
appearance of despair.

"Does he cry?" said the Faun.

"He does not cry," answered the hill. "His eyes are as dry as pebbles."

My tormentor made me look at him. "I see happiness at the bottom of your
heart," said he.

"I trust I have my secret springs," I answered stiffly. And then I
prepared a scathing denunciation, but of all the words I might have
said, I only said one and it began with "D."

He gave a joyful cry, "Oh, now you really belong to us. To the end of
your life you will swear when you are cross and laugh when you are
happy. Now laugh!"

There was a great silence. All nature stood waiting, while a curate
tried to conceal his thoughts not only from nature but from himself. I
thought of my injured pride, of my baffled unselfishness, of Emily, whom
I was losing through no fault of her own, of the little friend, who just
then slipped beneath the heavy tea basket, and that decided me, and I
laughed.

That evening, for the first time, I heard the chalk downs singing to
each other across the valleys, as they often do when the air is quiet
and they have had a comfortable day. From my study window I could see
the sunlit figure of the Faun, sitting before the beech copse as a man
sits before his house. And as night came on I knew for certain that not
only was he asleep, but that the hills and woods were asleep also. The
stream, of course, never slept, any more than it ever freezes. Indeed,
the hour of darkness is really the hour of water, which has been
somewhat stifled all day by the great pulsings of the land. That is why
you can feel it and hear it from a greater distance in the night, and
why a bath after sundown is most wonderful.

The joy of that first evening is still clear in my memory, in spite of
all the happy years that have followed. I remember it when I ascend my
pulpit--I have a living now--and look down upon the best people sitting
beneath me pew after pew, generous and contented, upon the worse people,
crowded in the aisles, upon the whiskered tenors of the choir, and the
high-browed curates and the church-wardens fingering their bags, and the
supercilious vergers who turn late comers from the door. I remember it
also when I sit in my comfortable bachelor reftory, amidst the carpet
slippers that good young ladies have worked for me, and the oak brackets
that have been carved for me by good young men; amidst my phalanx of
presentation teapots and my illuminated testimonials and all the other
offerings of people who believe that I have given them a helping hand,
and who really have helped me out of the mire themselves. And though I
try to communicate that joy to others--as I try to communicate anything
else that seems good--and though I sometimes succeed, yet I can tell no
one exactly how it came to me. For if I breathed one word of that, my
present life, so agreeable and profitable, would come to an end, my
congregation would depart, and so should I, and instead of being an
asset to my parish, I might find myself an expense to the nation.
Therefore in the place of the lyrical and rhetorical treatment, so
suitable to the subject, so congenial to my profession, I have been
forced to use the unworthy medium of a narrative, and to delude you by
declaring that this is a short story, suitable for reading in the train.




THE ROAD FROM COLONUS


I


For no very intelligible reason, Mr. Lucas had hurried ahead of his
party. He was perhaps reaching the age at which independence becomes
valuable, because it is so soon to be lost. Tired of attention and
consideration, he liked breaking away from the younger members, to ride
by himself, and to dismount unassisted. Perhaps he also relished that
more subtle pleasure of being kept waiting for lunch, and of telling the
others on their arrival that it was of no consequence.

So, with childish impatience, he battered the animal's sides with his
heels, and made the muleteer bang it with a thick stick and prick it
with a sharp one, and jolted down the hill sides through clumps of
flowering shrubs and stretches of anemones and asphodel, till he heard
the sound of running water, and came in sight of the group of plane
trees where they were to have their meal.

Even in England those trees would have been remarkable, so huge were
they, so interlaced, so magnificently clothed in quivering green. And
here in Greece they were unique, the one cool spot in that hard
brilliant landscape, already scorched by the heat of an April sun. In
their midst was hidden a tiny Khan or country inn, a frail mud building
with a broad wooden balcony in which sat an old woman spinning, while a
small brown pig, eating orange peel, stood beside her. On the wet earth
below squatted two children, playing some primaeval game with their
fingers; and their mother, none too clean either, was messing with some
rice inside. As Mrs. Forman would have said, it was all very Greek, and
the fastidious Mr. Lucas felt thankful that they were bringing their own
food with them, and should eat it in the open air.

Still, he was glad to be there--the muleteer had helped him off--and
glad that Mrs. Forman was not there to forestall his opinions--glad even
that he should not see Ethel for quite half an hour. Ethel was his
youngest daughter, still unmarried. She was unselfish and affectionate,
and it was generally understood that she was to devote her life to her
father, and be the comfort of his old age. Mrs. Forman always referred
to her as Antigone, and Mr. Lucas tried to settle down to the role of
Oedipus, which seemed the only one that public opinion allowed him.

He had this in common with Oedipus, that he was growing old. Even to
himself it had become obvious. He had lost interest in other people's
affairs, and seldom attended when they spoke to him. He was fond of
talking himself but often forgot what he was going to say, and even when
he succeeded, it seldom seemed worth the effort. His phrases and
gestures had become stiff and set, his anecdotes, once so successful,
fell flat, his silence was as meaningless as his speech. Yet he had led
a healthy, active life, had worked steadily, made money, educated his
children. There was nothing and no one to blame: he was simply growing
old.

At the present moment, here he was in Greece, and one of the dreams of
his life was realized. Forty years ago he had caught the fever of
Hellenism, and all his life he had felt that could he but visit that
land, he would not have lived in vain. But Athens had been dusty, Delphi
wet, Thermopylae flat, and he had listened with amazement and cynicism
to the rapturous exclamations of his companions. Greece was like
England: it was a man who was growing old, and it made no difference
whether that man looked at the Thames or the Eurotas. It was his last
hope of contradicting that logic of experience, and it was failing.

Yet Greece had done something for him, though he did not know it. It had
made him discontented, and there are stirrings of life in discontent. He
knew that he was not the victim of continual ill-luck. Something great
was wrong, and he was pitted against no mediocre or accidental enemy.
For the last month a strange desire had possessed him to die fighting.

"Greece is the land for young people," he said to himself as he stood
under the plane trees, "but I will enter into it, I will possess it.
Leaves shall be green again, water shall be sweet, the sky shall be
blue. They were so forty years ago, and I will win them back. I do mind
being old, and I will pretend no longer."

He took two steps forward, and immediately cold waters were gurgling
over his ankle.

"Where does the water come from?" he asked himself. "I do not even know
that." He remembered that all the hill sides were dry; yet here the road
was suddenly covered with flowing streams.

He stopped still in amazement, saying: "Water out of a tree--out of a
hollow tree? I never saw nor thought of that before."

For the enormous plane that leant towards the Khan was hollow--it had
been burnt out for charcoal--and from its living trunk there gushed an
impetuous spring, coating the bark! with fern and moss, and flowing over
the mule track to create fertile meadows beyond. The simple country folk
had paid to beauty and mystery such tribute as they could, for in the
rind of the tree a shrine was cut, holding a lamp and a little picture
of the Virgin, inheritor of the Naiad's and Dryad's joint abode.

"I never saw anything so marvellous before," said Mr. Lucas. "I could
even step inside the trunk and see where the water comes from."

For a moment he hesitated to violate the shrine. Then he remembered with
a smile his own thought--"the place shall be mine; I will enter it and
possess it"--and leapt almost aggressively on to a stone within.

The water pressed up steadily and noiselessly from the hollow roots and
hidden crevices of the plane, forming a wonderful amber pool ere it
spilt over the lip of bark on to the earth outside. Mr. Lucas tasted it
and it was sweet, and when he looked up the black funnel of the trunk he
saw sky which was blue, and some leaves which were green; and he
remembered, without smiling, another of his thoughts.

Others had been before him--indeed he had a curious sense of
companionship. Little votive offerings to the presiding Power were
fastened on to the bark--tiny arms and legs and eyes in tin, grotesque
models of the brain or the heart--all tokens of some recovery of
strength or wisdom or love. There was no such thing as the solitude of
nature for the sorrows and joys of humanity had pressed even into the
bosom of a tree. He spread out his arms and steadied himself against the
soft charred wood, and then slowly leant back, till his body was resting
on the trunk behind. His eyes closed, and he had the strange feeling of
one who is moving, yet at peace--the feeling of the swimmer, who, after
long struggling with chopping seas, finds that after all the tide will
sweep him to his goal.

So he lay motionless, conscious only of the stream below his feet, and
that all things were a stream, in which he was moving.

He was aroused at last by a shock--the shock of an arrival perhaps, for
when he opened his eyes, something unimagined, indefinable, had passed
over all things, and made them intelligible and good.

There was meaning in the stoop of the old woman over her work, and in
the quick motions of the little pig, and in her diminishing globe of
wool. A young man came singing over the streams on a mule, and there was
beauty in his pose and sincerity in his greeting. The sun made no
accidental patterns upon the spreading roots of the trees, and there was
intention in the nodding clumps of asphodel, and in the music of the
water. To Mr. Lucas, who, in a brief space of time, had discovered not
only Greece, but England and all the world and life, there seemed
nothing ludicrous in the desire to hang within the tree another votive
offering--a little model of an entire man.

"Why, here's papa, playing at being Merlin."

All unnoticed they had arrived--Ethel, Mrs. Forman, Mr. Graham, and the
English-speaking dragoman. Mr. Lucas peered out at them suspiciously.
They had suddenly become unfamiliar, and all that they did seemed
strained and coarse.

"Allow me to give you a hand," said Mr. Graham, a young man who was
always polite to his elders.

Mr. Lucas felt annoyed. "Thank you, I can manage perfectly well by
myself," he replied. His foot slipped as he stepped out of the tree, and
went into the spring.

"Oh papa, my papa!" said Ethel, "what are you doing? Thank goodness I
have got a change for you on the mule."

She tended him carefully, giving him clean socks and dry boots, and then
sat him down on the rug beside the lunch basket, while she went with the
others to explore the grove.

They came back in ecstasies, in which Mr. Lucas tried to join. But he
found them intolerable. Their enthusiasm was superficial, commonplace,
and spasmodic. They had no perception of the coherent beauty was
flowering around them. He tried at least to explain his feelings, and
what he said was:

"I am altogether pleased with the appearance of this place. It impresses
me very favourably. The trees are fine, remarkably fine for Greece, and
there is something very poetic in the spring of clear running water. The
people too seem kindly and civil. It is decidedly an attractive place."

Mrs. Forman upbraided him for his tepid praise.

"Oh, it is a place in a thousand!" she cried "I could live and die here!
I really would stop if I had not to be back at Athens! It reminds me of
the Colonus of Sophocles."

"Well, I must stop," said Ethel. "I positively must."

"Yes, do! You and your father! Antigone and Oedipus. Of course you must
stop at Colonus!"

Mr. Lucas was almost breathless with excitement. When he stood within
the tree, he had believed that his happiness would be independent of
locality. But these few minutes' conversation had undeceived him. He no
longer trusted himself to journey through the world, for old thoughts,
old wearinesses might be waiting to rejoin him as soon as he left the
shade of the planes, and the music of the virgin water. To sleep in the
Khan with the gracious, kind-eyed country people, to watch the bats flit
about within the globe of shade, and see the moon turn the golden
patterns into silver--one such night would place him beyond relapse, and
confirm him for ever in the kingdom he had regained. But all his lips
could say was: "I should be willing to put in a night here."

"You mean a week, papa! It would be sacrilege to put in less."

"A week then, a week," said his lips, irritated at being corrected,
while his heart was leaping with joy. All through lunch he spoke to them
no more, but watched the place he should know so well, and the people
who would so soon be his companions and friends. The inmates of the Khan
only consisted of an old woman, a middle-aged woman, a young man and two
children, and to none of them had he spoken, yet he loved them as he
loved everything that moved or breathed or existed beneath the
benedictory shade of the planes.

"_En route!_" said the shrill voice of Mrs. Forman. "Ethel! Mr. Graham!
The best of things must end."

"To-night," thought Mr. Lucas, "they will light the little lamp by the
shrine. And when we all sit together on the balcony, perhaps they will
tell me which offerings they put up."

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Lucas," said Graham, "but they want to fold up
the rug you are sitting on."

Mr. Lucas got up, saying to himself: "Ethel shall go to bed first, and
then I will try to tell them about my offering too--for it is a thing I
must do. I think they will understand if I am left with them alone."

Ethel touched him on the cheek. "Papa! I've called you three times. All
the mules are here."

"Mules? What mules?"

"Our mules. We're all waiting. Oh, Mr. Graham, do help my father on."

"I don't know what you're talking about, Ethel."

"My dearest papa, we must start. You know we have to get to Olympia
to-night."

Mr. Lucas in pompous, confident tones replied: "I always did wish,
Ethel, that you had a better head for plans. You know perfectly well
that we are putting in a week here. It is your own suggestion."

Ethel was startled into impoliteness. "What a perfectly ridiculous idea.
You must have known I was joking. Of course I meant I wished we could."

"Ah! if we could only do what we wished!" sighed Mrs. Forman, already
seated on her mule.

"Surely," Ethel continued in calmer tones, "you didn't think I meant
it."

"Most certainly I did. I have made all my plans on the supposition that
we are stopping here, and it will be extremely inconvenient, indeed,
impossible for me to start."

He delivered this remark with an air of great conviction, and Mrs.
Forman and Mr. Graham had to turn away to hide their smiles.

"I am sorry I spoke so carelessly; it was wrong of me. But, you know, we
can't break up our party, and even one night here would make us miss the
boat at Patras."

Mrs. Forman, in an aside, called Mr. Graham's attention to the excellent
way in which Ethel managed her father.

"I don't mind about the Patras boat. You said that we should stop here,
and we are stopping."

It seemed as if the inhabitants of the Khan had divined in some
mysterious way that the altercation touched them. The old woman stopped
her spinning, while the young man and the two children stood behind Mr.
Lucas, as if supporting him.

Neither arguments nor entreaties moved him. He said little, but he was
absolutely determined, because for the first time he saw his daily life
aright. What need had he to return to England? Who would miss him? His
friends were dead or cold. Ethel loved him in a way, but, as was right,
she had other interests. His other children he seldom saw. He had only
one other relative, his sister Julia, whom he both feared and hated. It
was no effort to struggle. He would be a fool as well as a coward if he
stirred from the place which brought him happiness and peace.

At last Ethel, to humour him, and not disinclined to air her modern
Greek, went into the Khan with the astonished dragoman to look at the
rooms. The woman inside received them with loud welcomes, and the young
man, when no one was looking, began to lead Mr. Lucas' mule to the
stable.

"Drop it, you brigand!" shouted Graham, who always declared that
foreigners could understand English if they chose. He was right, for the
man obeyed, and they all stood waiting for Ethel's return.

She emerged at last, with close-gathered skirts, followed by the
dragoman bearing the little pig, which he had bought at a bargain.

"My dear papa, I will do all I can for you, but stop in that Khan--no."

"Are there--fleas?" asked Mrs. Forman.

Ethel intimated that "fleas" was not the word.

"Well, I am afraid that settles it," said Mrs. Forman, "I know how
particular Mr. Lucas is."

"It does not settle it," said Mr. Lucas. "Ethel, you go on. I do not
want you. I don't know why I ever consulted you. I shall stop here
alone."

"That is absolute nonsense," said Ethel, losing her temper. "How can you
be left alone at your age? How would you get your meals or your bath?
All your letters are waiting for you at Patras. You'll miss the boat.
That means missing the London operas, and upsetting all your engagements
for the month. And as if you could travel by yourself!"

"They might knife you," was Mr. Graham's contribution.

The Greeks said nothing; but whenever Mr. Lucas looked their way, they
beckoned him towards the Khan. The children would even have drawn him by
the coat, and the old woman on the balcony stopped her almost completed
spinning, and fixed him with mysterious appealing eyes. As he fought,
the issue assumed gigantic proportions, and he believed that he was not
merely stopping because he had regained youth or seen beauty or found
happiness, but because in, that place and with those people a supreme
event was awaiting him which would transfigure the face of the world.
The moment was so tremendous that he abandoned words and arguments as
useless, and rested on the strength of his mighty unrevealed allies:
silent men, murmuring water, and whispering trees. For the whole place
called with one voice, articulate to him, and his garrulous opponents
became every minute more meaningless and absurd. Soon they would be
tired and go chattering away into the sun, leaving him to the cool grove
and the moonlight and the destiny he foresaw.

Mrs. Forman and the dragoman had indeed already started, amid the
piercing screams of the little pig, and the struggle might have gone on
indefinitely if Ethel had not called in Mr. Graham.

"Can you help me?" she whispered. "He is absolutely unmanageable."

"I'm no good at arguing--but if I could help you in any other way----"
and he looked down complacently at his well-made figure.

Ethel hesitated. Then she said: "Help me in any way you can. After all,
it is for his good that we do it."

"Then have his mule led up behind him."

So when Mr. Lucas thought he had gained the day, he suddenly felt
himself lifted off the ground, and sat sideways on the saddle, and at
the same time the mule started off at a trot. He said nothing, for he
had nothing to say, and even his face showed little emotion as he felt
the shade pass and heard the sound of the water cease. Mr. Graham was
running at his side, hat in hand, apologizing.

"I know I had no business to do it, and I do beg your pardon awfully.
But I do hope that some day you too will feel that I was--damn!"

A stone had caught him in the middle of the back. It was thrown by the
little boy, who was pursuing them along the mule track. He was followed
by his sister, also throwing stones.

Ethel screamed to the dragoman, who was some way ahead with Mrs. Forman,
but before he could rejoin them, another adversary appeared. It was the
young Greek, who had cut them off in front, and now dashed down at Mr.
Lucas' bridle. Fortunately Graham was an expert boxer, and it did not
take him a moment to beat down the youth's feeble defence, and to send
him sprawling with a bleeding mouth into the asphodel. By this time the
dragoman had arrived, the children, alarmed at the fate of their
brother, had desisted, and the rescue party, if such it is to be
considered, retired in disorder to the trees.

"Little devils!" said Graham, laughing; with triumph. "That's the modern
Greek all over. Your father meant money if he stopped, and they consider
we were taking it out of their pocket."

"Oh, they are terrible--simple savages! I don't know how I shall ever
thank you. You've saved my father."

"I only hope you didn't think me brutal."

"No," replied Ethel with a little sigh. "I admire strength."

Meanwhile the cavalcade reformed, and Mr. Lucas, who, as Mrs. Forman
said, bore his disappointment wonderfully well, was put comfortably on
to his mule. They hurried up the opposite hillside, fearful of another
attack, and it was not until they had left the eventful place far behind
that Ethel found an opportunity to speak to her father and ask his
pardon for the way she had treated him.

"You seemed so different, dear father, and you quite frightened me. Now
I feel that you are your old self again."

He did not answer, and she concluded that he was not unnaturally
offended at her behaviour.

By one of those curious tricks of mountain scenery, the place they had
left an hour before suddenly reappeared far below them. The Khan was
hidden under the green dome, but in the open there still stood three
figures, and through the pure air rose up a faint cry of defiance or
farewell.

Mr. Lucas stopped irresolutely, and let the reins fall from his hand.

"Come, father dear," said Ethel gently.

He obeyed, and in another moment a spur of the hill hid the dangerous
scene for ever.



II


It was breakfast time, but the gas was alight, owing to the fog. Mr.
Lucas was in the middle of an account of a bad night he had spent,
Ethel, who was to be married in a few weeks, had her arms on the table,
listening.

"First the door bell rang, then you came back from the theatre. Then the
dog started, and after the dog the cat. And at three in the morning a
young hooligan passed by singing. Oh yes: then there was the water
gurgling in the pipe above my head."

"I think that was only the bath water running away," said Ethel, looking
rather worn.

"Well, there's nothing I dislike more than running water. It's
perfectly impossible to sleep in the house. I shall give it up. I shall
give notice next quarter. I shall tell the landlord plainly, 'The reason
I am giving up the house is this: it is perfectly impossible to sleep in
it.' If he says--says--well, what has he got to say?"

"Some more toast, father?"

"Thank you, my dear." He took it, and there was an interval of peace.

But he soon recommenced. "I'm not going to submit to the practising next
door as tamely as they think. I wrote and told them so--didn't I?"

"Yes," said Ethel, who had taken care that the letter should not reach.
"I have seen the governess, and she has promised to arrange it
differently. And Aunt Julia hates noise. It will sure to be all right."

Her aunt, being the only unattached member of the family, was coming to
keep house for her father when she left him. The reference was not a
happy one, and Mr. Lucas commenced a series of half articulate sighs,
which was only stopped by the arrival of the post.

"Oh, what a parcel!" cried Ethel. "For me! What can it be! Greek stamps.
This is most exciting!"

It proved to be some asphodel bulbs, sent by Mrs. Forman from Athens for
planting in the conservatory.

"Doesn't it bring it all back! You remember the asphodels, father. And
all wrapped up in Greek newspapers. I wonder if I can read them still. I
used to be able to, you know."

She rattled on, hoping to conceal the laughter of the children next
door--a favourite source of querulousness at breakfast time.

"Listen to me! 'A rural disaster.' Oh, I've hit on something sad. But
never mind. 'Last Tuesday at Plataniste, in the province of messenia, a
shocking tragedy occurred. A large tree'--aren't I getting on
well?--'blew down in the night and'--wait a minute--oh, dear! 'crushed
to death the five occupants of the little Khan there, who had apparently
been sitting in the balcony. The bodies of Maria Rhomaides, the aged
proprietress, and of her daughter, aged forty-six, were easily
recognizable, whereas that of her grandson'--oh, the rest is really too
horrid; I wish I had never tried it, and what's more I feel to have
heard the name Plataniste before. We didn't stop there, did we, in the
spring?"

"We had lunch," said Mr. Lucas, with a faint expression of trouble on
his vacant face. "Perhaps it was where the dragoman bought the pig."

"Of course," said Ethel in a nervous voice. "Where the dragoman bought
the little pig. How terrible!"

"Very terrible!" said her father, whose attention was wandering to the
noisy children next door. Ethel suddenly started to her feet with
genuine interest.

"Good gracious!" she exclaimed. "This is an old paper. It happened not
lately but in April--the night of Tuesday the eighteenth--and we--we
must have been there in the afternoon."

"So we were," said Mr. Lucas. She put her hand to her heart, scarcely
able to speak.

"Father, dear father, I must say it: you wanted to stop there. All those
people, those poor half savage people, tried, to keep you, and they're
dead. The whole place, it says, is in ruins, and even the stream has
changed its course. Father, dear, if it had not been for me, and if
Arthur had not helped me, you must have been killed."

Mr. Lucas waved his hand irritably. "It is not a bit of good speaking to
the governess, I shall write to the landlord and say, 'The reason I am
giving up the house is this: the dog barks, the children next door are
intolerable, and I cannot stand the noise of running water.'"

Ethel did not check his babbling. She was aghast at the narrowness of
the escape, and for a long time kept silence. At last she said: "Such a
marvellous deliverance does make one believe in Providence."

Mr. Lucas, who was still composing his letter to the landlord, did not
reply.

Before there was civilization in Egypt, or the delta of the Nile had
been formed, the whole country as far south as modern Cairo lay under
the sea. The shores of this sea were a limestone desert. The coast line
was smooth usually, but at the north-west corner a remarkable spur
jutted out from the main mass. It was less than a mile wide, but thirty
miles long. Its base is not far from Bahig, Alexandria is built half-way
down it, its tip is the headland of Aboukir. On either side of it there
was once deep salt water.

Centuries passed, and the Nile, issuing out of its crack above Cairo,
kept carrying down the muds of Upper Egypt and dropping them as soon as
its current slackened. In the north-west corner they were arrested by
this spur and began to silt up against it. It was a shelter not only
from the outer sea, but from the prevalent wind. Alluvial land appeared;
the large shallow lake of Mariout was formed; and the current of the
Nile, unable to escape through the limestone barrier, rounded the
headland of Aboukir and entered the outer sea by what was known in
historical times as the “Canopic” mouth.

To the north of the spur and more or less parallel to it runs a second
range of limestone. It is much shorter, also much lower, lying mainly
below the surface of the sea in the form of reefs, but without it there
would have been no harbours (and consequently no Alexandria), because it
breaks the force of the waves. Starting at Agame, it continues as a
series of rocks across the entrance of the modern harbour. Then it
re-emerges to form the promontory of Ras el Tin, disappears into a
second series of rocks that close the entrance of the Eastern Harbour,
and makes its final appearance as the promontory of Silsileh, after
which it rejoins the big spur.

Such is the scene where the following actions and meditations take
place; that limestone ridge, with alluvial country on one side of it and
harbours on the other, jutting from the desert, pointing towards the
Nile; a scene unique in Egypt, nor have the Alexandrians ever been truly
Egyptian. Here Africans, Greeks and Jews combined to make a city; here a
thousand years later the Arabs set faintly but durably the impress of
the Orient; here after secular decay rose another city, still visible,
where I worked or appeared to work during a recent war. Pharos, the vast
and heroic lighthouse that dominated the first city—under Pharos I have
grouped a few antique events; to modern events and to personal
impressions I have given the name of Pharillon, the obscure successor of
Pharos, which clung for a time to the low rock of Silsileh and then slid
unobserved into the Mediterranean.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 PHAROS




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 PHAROS


                                   I

The career of Menelaus was a series of small mishaps. It was after he
had lost Helen, and indeed after he had recovered her and was returning
from Troy, that a breeze arose from the north-west and obliged him to
take refuge upon a desert island. It was of limestone, close to the
African coast, and to the estuary though not to the exit of the Nile,
and it was protected from the Mediterranean by an outer barrier of
reefs. Here he remained for twenty days, in no danger, but in high
discomfort, for the accommodation was insufficient for the Queen. Helen
had been to Egypt ten years before, under the larger guidance of Paris,
and she could not but remark that there was nothing to see upon the
island and nothing to eat and that its beaches were infested with seals.
Action must be taken, Menelaus decided. He sought the sky and sea, and
chancing at last to apprehend an old man he addressed to him the
following wingèd word:

“What island is this?”

“Pharaoh’s,” the old man replied.

“Pharos?”

“Yes, Pharaoh’s, Prouti’s”—Prouti being another title (it occurs in the
hieroglyphs) for the Egyptian king.

“Proteus?”

“Yes.”

As soon as Menelaus had got everything wrong, the wind changed and he
returned to Greece with news of an island named Pharos whose old man was
called Proteus and whose beaches were infested with nymphs. Under such
misapprehensions did it enter our geography.

Pharos was hammer-headed, and long before Menelaus landed some unknown
power—Cretan—Atlantean—had fastened a harbour against its western
promontory. To the golden-haired king, as to us, the works of that
harbour showed only as ochreous patches and lines beneath the dancing
waves, for the island has always been sinking, and the quays, jetties,
and double breakwater of its pre-historic port can only be touched by
the swimmer now. Already was their existence forgotten, and it was on
the other promontory—the eastern—that the sun of history arose, never to
set. Alexander the Great came here. Philhellene, he proposed to build a
Greek city upon Pharos. But the ridge of an island proved too narrow a
site for his ambition, and the new city was finally built upon the
opposing coast—Alexandria. Pharos, tethered to Alexandria by a long
causeway, became part of a larger scheme and only once re-entered
Alexander’s mind: he thought of it at the death of Hephæstion, as he
thought of all holy or delectable spots, and he arranged that upon its
distant shore a shrine should commemorate his friend, and reverberate
the grief that had convulsed Ecbatana and Babylon.

Meanwhile the Jews had been attentive. They, too, liked delectable
spots. Deeply as they were devoted to Jehovah, they had ever felt it
their duty to leave his city when they could, and as soon as Alexandria
began to develop they descended upon her markets with polite cries. They
found so much to do that they decided against returning to Jerusalem,
and met so many Greeks that they forgot how to speak Hebrew. They
speculated in theology and grain, they lent money to Ptolemy the second
king, and filled him (they tell us) with such enthusiasm for their
religion that he commanded them to translate their Scriptures for their
own benefit. He himself selected the translators, and assigned for their
labours the island of Pharos because it was less noisy than the
mainland. Here he shut up seventy rabbis in seventy huts, whence in an
incredibly short time they emerged with seventy identical translations
of the Bible. Everything corresponded. Even when they slipped they made
seventy slips, and Greek literature was at last enriched by the
possession of an inspired book. It was left to later generations to pry
into Jehovah’s scholarship and to deduce that the Septuagint translation
must have extended over a long period and not have reached completion
till 100 B.C. The Jews of Alexandria knew no such doubts. Every year
they made holiday on Pharos in remembrance of the miracle, and built
little booths along the beaches where Helen had once shuddered at the
seals. The island became a second Sinai whose moderate thunders thrilled
the philosophic world. A translation, even when it is the work of God,
is never as intimidating as an original; and the unknown author of the
“Wisdom of Solomon” shows, in his delicious but dubious numbers, how
unalarming even an original could be when it was composed at Alexandria:

    Let us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us
    speedily use the creatures like as in youth.

    Let us fill ourselves with costly wine and ointments, and let no
    flower of the spring pass by us.

    Let us crown ourselves with rose-buds before they are withered.

    Let none of us go without his part in our voluptuousness, let us
    leave tokens of our joyfulness in every place, for this is our
    portion and our lot is this.

It is true that, pulling himself together, the writer goes on to remind
us that the above remarks are no elegy on Alexander and Hephæstion, but
an indictment of the ungodly, and must be read sarcastically.

    Such things they did imagine and were deceived, for their own
    wickedness hath blinded them.

    As for the mysteries of God they knew them not, neither hoped
    they for the wages of righteousness nor discerned a reward for
    blameless souls.

    For God created man to be immortal, and made him to be the image
    of his own eternity.

But it is too late. And all racial and religious effort was too late.
Though Pharos was not to be Greek it was not to be Hebrew either. A more
impartial power dominated it. Five hundred feet above all shrines and
huts, Science had already raised her throne.


                                   II

A lighthouse was a necessity. The coast of Egypt is, in its western
section, both flat and rocky, and ships needed a landmark to show them
where Alexandria lay, and a guide through the reefs that block her
harbours. Pharos was the obvious site, because it stood in front of the
city; and on Pharos the eastern promontory, because it commanded the
more important of the two harbours—the Royal. But it is not clear
whether a divine madness also seized the builders, whether they
deliberately winged engineering with poetry, and tried to add a wonder
to the world. At all events they succeeded, and the arts combined with
science to praise their triumph. Just as the Parthenon had been
identified with Athens, and St. Peter’s was to be identified with Rome,
so, to the imagination of contemporaries, “The Pharos” became Alexandria
and Alexandria the Pharos. Never, in the history of architecture, has a
secular building been thus worshipped and taken on a spiritual life of
its own. It beaconed to the imagination, not only to ships, and long
after its light was extinguished memories of it glowed in the minds of
men. Perhaps it was merely very large; reconstructions strike a chill,
and the minaret, its modern descendant, is not supremely beautiful.
Something very large to which people got used—a Liberty Statue, an
Eiffel Tower? The possibility must be faced, and is not excluded by the
ecstasies of the poets.

The lighthouse was made of local limestone, of marble, and of
reddish-purple granite from Assouan. It stood in a colonnaded court that
covered most of the promontory. There were four stories. The bottom
story was over two hundred feet high, square, pierced with many windows.
In it were the rooms (estimated at three hundred) where the mechanics
and keepers were housed, and its mass was threaded by a spiral ascent,
probably by a double spiral. There may have been hydraulic machinery in
the central well for raising the fuel to the top; otherwise we must
imagine a procession of donkeys who cease not night and day to
circumambulate the spirals with loads of wood upon their backs. The
story ended in a cornice and in statues of Tritons: here too, in great
letters of lead, was a Greek inscription mentioning the architect:
“Sostratus of Cnidus, son of Dexiphanes, to the Saviour Gods: for
sailors”—an inscription which, despite its simplicity, bore a double
meaning. The Saviour Gods were the Dioscuri, but a courtly observer
could refer them to Ptolemy Soter and his wife, whose worship their son
was then promoting. For the building of the lighthouse (279 B.C.) was
connected with an elaborate dynastic propaganda known as the
“As-good-as-Olympic Games,” and with a mammoth pageant which passed
through the streets of Alexandria, regardless of imagination and
expense. Nothing could be seen in the pageant, neither elephants nor
camels nor dances of wild men, nor allegorical females upon a car, nor
eggs that opened and disclosed the Dioscuri; and the inscription on the
first story of the Pharos was a subtle echo of its appeal.

The second story was octagonal and entirely filled by the ascending
spirals. The third story was circular. Then came the lantern. The
lantern is a puzzle, because a bonfire and delicate scientific
instruments appear to have shared its narrow area. Visitors speak, for
instance, of a mysterious “mirror” up there, which was even more
wonderful than the building itself. Why didn’t this mirror crack, and
what was it? A polished steel reflector for the fire at night or for
heliography by day? Some writers describe it as made of finely wrought
glass or transparent stone, and declare that when they sat under it they
could see ships at sea that were invisible to the naked eye. A
telescope? Is it conceivable that the Alexandrian school of mathematics
and mechanics discovered the lens and that their discovery was lost and
forgotten when the Pharos fell? It is possible: the discoveries of
Aristarchus were forgotten, and Galileo persecuted for reviving them. It
is certain that the lighthouse was equipped with every scientific
improvement known to the age, that it was the outward expression of the
studies pursued in the Museum across the straits, and that its architect
could have consulted not only Aristarchus, but Eratosthenes, Apollonius
of Perga, and Euclid.

Standing on the lantern, at the height of five hundred feet above the
ground, a statue of Poseidon struck the pious note, and gave a Greek air
to Africa seen from the sea. Other works of art are also reported: for
example, a statue whose finger followed the diurnal course of the sun, a
second statue who gave out with varying and melodious voices the various
hours of the day, and a third who shouted an alarm as soon as a hostile
flotilla set sail from any foreign port. This last must belong to an
even more remarkable building, the Pharos of legend, which we will
measure in a moment. The lighthouse was the key of the Alexandrian
defences, and Cæsar occupied it before attacking the city. It was also
the pivot of a signalling system that stretched along the coast. Fifteen
miles to the west, on a ridge among masses of marigolds, the little
watch-tower of Abousir is still standing, and it reproduces, in its
three stories, the arrangements of Sostratus.


                                  III

“I have taken a city,” wrote the Arab conqueror of Alexandria, “of which
I can only say that it contains 4000 palaces, 4000 baths, 400 theatres,
12,000 greengrocers, and 40,000 Jews.” It contained a lighthouse, too,
for the Pharos was still perfect and functioned for a few years more,
lighting the retreating fleets of Europe with its beams. Then a slow
dissolution began, and it shrinks, looms through the mists of legend,
disappears. The first, and the irreparable, disaster was the fall of the
lantern in the eighth century, carrying with it scientific apparatus
that could not be replaced. Annoyed (say the Arabs) with the magic
mirror that detected or scorched their ships, the Christians made a
plot, and sent a messenger to Islam with news of a treasure in Syria.
The treasure was found, whereupon the messenger reported something
supreme—the whole wealth of Alexander and other Pharaohs which lay in
the foundations of the lighthouse. Demolition began, and before the
Alexandrians, who knew better, could intervene, the mirror had fallen
and was smashed on the rocks beneath. Henceforward the Pharos is only a
stump with a bonfire on the top. The Arabs made some restorations, but
they were unsubstantial additions to the octagon, which the wind could
blow away. Structural repairs were neglected, and in the twelfth century
the second disaster occurred—the fall of the octagon through an
earthquake. The square bottom story survived as a watch-tower. Two
hundred years later it vanished in a final earthquake, and the very
island where it had stood modified its shape and became a peninsula,
joined to the mainland by a strip of sand.

Though unable to maintain the lighthouse on earth, the Arabs did much
for it in the realms of fancy, increasing its height to seven hundred
feet, and endowing it with various magical objects, of which the most
remarkable was a glass crab. There really were crabs at Alexandria, but
of copper, quite small, and standing under Cleopatra’s Needle; America
possesses one to-day. Oriental imagination mixed two monuments into one,
and caused a Moorish army to invade the Pharos and to ride through its
three hundred rooms. The entrance gate vanished, and they could not find
their way out, but ever descending the spirals came at last to the glass
crab, slipped through a crack in its back and were drowned. Happier,
though equally obscure, was the fate of another visitor, the poet El
Deraoui. Who sings:

    A lofty platform guides the voyager by night, guides him with
    its light when the darkness of evening falls.

    Thither have I borne a garment of perfect pleasure among my
    friends, a garment adorned with the memory of beloved
    companions.

    On its height a dome enshadowed me, and there I saw my friends
    like stars.

    I thought that the sea below me was a cloud, and that I had set
    up my tent in the midst of the heavens.

Only occasionally does the note of disillusionment and bitterness creep
in. Jelaled Din ibn Mokram complains that:

    The visitor to Alexandria receives nothing in the way of
    hospitality except some water and a description of Pompey’s
    Pillar.

    Those who make a special effort sometimes give him a little
    fresh air too, and tell him where the Pharos is, adding a sketch
    of the sea and its waves and an account of the large Greek
    ships.

    The visitor need not aspire to receive any bread, for to an
    application of this type there is no reply.

As a rule, life in its shadow is an earthly ecstasy that may even touch
heaven. Hark to Ibn Dukmak:

    According to the law of Moses, if a man make a pilgrimage round
    Alexandria in the morning, God will make for him a golden crown
    set with pearls, perfumed with musk and camphor and shining from
    the east to the west.

Nor were the Arabs content with praising the lighthouse: they even
looked at it. “El Manarah,” as they called it, gave the name to, and
became the model for, the minaret, and one can still find minarets in
Egypt that exactly reproduce the design of Sostratus—the bottom story
square, second octagonal, third round.

The Fort of Kait Bey, built in the fifteenth century and itself now a
ruin, stands to-day where the Pharos once stood. Its area covers part of
the ancient enclosure—the rest is awash with the sea—and in its
containing wall are embedded a few granite columns. Inside the area is a
mosque, exactly occupying the site of the lighthouse, and built upon its
foundations: here, too, are some granite blocks standing with druidical
effect at the mosque’s entrance. Nothing else can be attributed to the
past, its stones have vanished and its spirit also. Again and again,
looking at the mosque, have I tried to multiply its height by five, and
thus build up its predecessor. The effort always failed: it did not seem
reasonable that so large an edifice should have existed. The dominant
memory in the chaos is now British, for here are some large holes, made
by Admiral Seymour when he bombarded the Fort in 1882 and laid the basis
of our intercourse with modern Egypt.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          THE RETURN FROM SIWA


Alexander the Great founded Alexandria. He came with Dinocrates, his
architect, and ordered him to build, between the sea and the lake, a
magnificent Greek town. Alexander still conceived of civilization as an
extended Greece, and of himself as a Hellene. He had taken over
Hellenism with the ardour that only a proselyte knows. A Balkan
barbarian by birth, he had pushed himself into the enchanted but
enfeebled circle of little city states. He had flattered Athens and
spared Thebes, and preached a crusade against Persia, which should
repeat upon a vaster scale the victories of Marathon and Salamis. He
would even repeat the Trojan war. At the Dardanelles his archæological
zeal was such that he ran naked round the tomb of Achilles. He cut the
knot of Gordius. He appeased the soul of Priam.

Having annexed Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt from the
Persians, and having given his orders to Dinocrates, he left the city he
was building, and rode with a few friends into the western desert. It
was summer. The waters of Lake Mariout, more copious then than now,
spread fertility for a space. Leaving their zone, he struck south, over
the limestone hills, and lost sight of civilization whether of the
Hellenic or non-Hellenic type. Around him little flat pebbles shimmered
and danced in the heat, gazelles stared, and pieces of sky slopped into
the sand. Over him was the pale blue dome of heaven, darkened, if we are
to believe his historian, by flocks of obsequious birds, who sheltered
the King with their shadows and screamed when he rode the wrong way.
Alexander went on till he saw below him, in the fall of the ground, the
canals and hot springs and olives and palms of the Oasis of Siwa.

Sekhet-Amit the Egyptians called it, and worshipped their god Amen
there, whom the Greeks call Ammon, worshipped him in the form of an
emerald that lay in a sacred boat, worshipped him as a ram also. Instead
of the twin mud-cities of Siwa and Aghurmi, Alexander saw pylons and
colonnades, and descending into the steamy heat of the Oasis approached
a lonely and mysterious shrine. For what was it mysterious? Perhaps
merely for its loneliness. The distance, the solitude of the desert,
touch travellers even to-day, and sharpen the imaginations of men who
have crossed in armoured cars, and whom no god awaits, only a tract of
green. Alexander rode, remembering how, two hundred years before him,
the Persians had ridden to loot the temple, and how on them as they were
eating in the desert a sandstorm had descended, burying diners and
dinner in company. Herein lay the magic of Siwa. It was difficult to
reach. He, being the greatest man of his epoch, had of course succeeded.
He, the Philhellene, had come. His age was twenty-five. Then took place
that celebrated and extraordinary episode. According to the official
account the Priest came out of the temple and saluted the young tourist
as Son of God. Alexander acquiesced and asked whether he would become
King of this World. The reply was in the affirmative. Then his friends
asked whether they should worship him. They were told that they should,
and the episode closed. Some say that it is to be explained by the
Priest’s bad Greek. He meant to say Paidion (“my child”) and said
Paidios (“O Son of God”) instead. Others say that it never took place,
and Walter Savage Landor has imagined a conversation in the course of
which the Priest scares the King by a snake. A scare he did get—a
fright, a psychic experience, a vision, a “turn.” His development proves
it. After his return from Siwa his aspirations alter. Never again does
he regard Greece as the centre of the world.

The building of Alexandria proceeded, and copied or magnified forms from
the perishing peninsula overseas. Dinocrates planned Greek temples and
market-places, and they were constructed not slavishly but with
intelligence, for the Greek spirit still lived. But it lived
consciously, not unconsciously as in the past. It had a mission, and no
missionary shall ever create. And Alexander, the heroic chaos of whose
heart surged with desire for all that can and can not be, turned away
from his Hellenic town-planning and his narrow little antiquarian
crusade, and flung himself again, but in a new spirit, against the might
of Persia. He fought her as a lover now. He wanted not to convert but to
harmonize, and conceived himself as the divine and impartial ruler
beneath whom harmony shall proceed. That way lies madness. Persia fell.
Then it was the turn of India. Then the turn of Rome would have come and
then he could have sailed westward (such was his expressed intention)
until he had conquered the Night and eastward until he had conquered the
Day. He was never—despite the tuition of Aristotle—a balanced young man,
and his old friends complained that in this latter period he sometimes
killed them. But to us, who cannot have the perilous honour of his
acquaintance, he grows more lovable now than before. He has caught, by
the unintellectual way, a glimpse of something great, if dangerous, and
that glimpse came to him first in the recesses of the Siwan Oasis. When
at the age of thirty-three he died, when the expedition that he did not
seek stole towards him in the summer-house at Babylon, did it seem to
him as after all but the crown of his smaller quests? He had tried to
lead Greece, then he had tried to lead mankind. He had succeeded in
both. But was the universe also friendly, was it also in trouble, was it
calling on him, on him, for his help and his love? The priest of Amen
had addressed him as “Son of God.” What exactly did the compliment mean?
Was it explicable this side of the grave?


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                EPIPHANY


During the last years of their lives the old King and Queen had seldom
left the Palace. They sought seclusion, though for different reasons.
The King, who was gay and shy, did not wish his pleasures to be
observed. He had gathered a suitable circle of friends round him, and
was content. There was Agathocles—who, by the way, was Prime Minister;
there was Agathoclea—who, by the way, was the little prince’s nurse;
there was Œnanthe, the mother of the two A.’s, an elderly but
accomplished woman who knew how to shampoo. And there were one or two
more, for instance the wife of a forage contractor who would say to the
King, “Here, Daddy, drink this.” The King liked young women who called
him Daddy; and he drank, and when he had drunk enough he would get up
and dance, the others danced too, he would fall down, it was all
delightful. But it was not a delight he desired his subjects to witness.

The Queen employed herself otherwise. Shut up in her own apartments, she
meditated on the past. She thought of all the years when she had been on
trial: the King had never cared for her, and, though negotiating for the
marriage, had kept her waiting. Then came the Battle of Rafa. The
Syrians were invading Egypt, and just as the Egyptian army was breaking
she had ridden forth among the elephants, her hair streaming, her colour
high, and had turned defeat into victory. She became the popular
heroine, and he married her. But for nine years they had had no child.
She could see no hope anywhere. The child had come, but the situation
had not changed. Months passed, and still she sat in the Palace
enclosure—the Fortress inside the fortress of the Royal City—and looked
from the promontory that we now call Silsileh across the harbour to
Pharos, and over the unvarying expanse of the sea.

Change came at last. One night, when the King fell down, he failed to
get up again. Agathoclea paid him every attention, but he passed into a
stupor and died in her arms. His friends were in despair. He had been
such a jolly old King. And besides, what were they to do? The Queen, on
the other hand, came forward in an unexpected light. There was no
occasion for anxiety, she told them. She knew what to do quite well. She
was now Regent, and her first act was to dismiss the ministry. Moreover,
since he was now four years old, her son no longer required a nurse. The
old heroic feelings came back to her. Life seemed worth living again;
She returned to her apartments full of exaltation. She entered them. As
she did so, the curtains, which had been soaked with inflammable oil in
her absence, burst into flame. She tried to retire. The doors had been
locked behind her, and she was burnt to death.

And the life of Alexandria went on as before. Œnanthe and her progeny
still drove about in the state carriages. The King and Queen still
failed to appear in public, and the Palace still rose inviolate inside
the walls of the Royal City. Months passed, fourteen months.

When rumours began, the A.’s neglected to act. Inertia had served them
so well that they did not know how to relinquish it. But rumours
continued, and after many consultations they devised a pageant that had
the feeblest effect. It was not true, they said, that the old King and
Queen had died a year ago. But it was true that they were dead. They had
died that very minute. Alas! Woe, oh woe! Here were their urns. Their
little son was now King. Here he was. Agathocles had been appointed
Regent. Here was the will. Agathoclea—here she was—would continue to be
nurse. The people, sceptical and sullen, watched the display, which took
place in a high gallery of the Palace, overhanging the town. The actors
made their bow, and gathering up the exhibits retired. All went on as
usual for a little longer.

It was the misgovernment of Agathocles that brought things to a crisis:
that, and the report that of the two urns only one contained human
remains: the other, which was supposed to hold the Queen, was a dummy.
Perhaps the little boy would vanish next. They must see him, touch him.
And they stormed the Palace. It was in vain that the Regent parleyed,
threatened, or that Agathoclea repeated that she was the royal nurse.
The soldiers joined the people, and they broke gate after gate. At last
the Regent cried, “Take him!” and, flinging their King at them, fled.
The child was already in tears. They put him on a horse, and led it
outside to the racecourse, where were assembled more human beings than
he had ever dreamt of, who shouted Epiphany! Epiphany! and pulled him
off the horse and made him sit on a large seat. This was the world and
he did not like it. He preferred his own little circle. Someone cried,
“Shall we not punish your mother’s murderers?” He sobbed, “Oh yes—oh
anything,” and it was so. The Regent and his sister had hidden in the
Palace. Œnanthe had driven two miles away to the Thesmophorion, a
sanctuary near the present Nouzha Gardens. All were dragged from their
retreats, tortured, and killed, the women being stripped naked first.

Such were the circumstances of the accession of Ptolemy V., surnamed
Epiphanes, 204 B.C.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          PHILO’S LITTLE TRIP


It was nearly a serious tumble—more serious than he anticipated. There
were six in his party, all Hebrew gentlemen of position and
intelligence, such as may be seen in these days filling a first-class
carriage in the Cairo express on their way up to interview the
Government. In those days the Government was not at Cairo but at Rome,
and the six gentlemen were on their way to interview the Emperor
Caligula. Observe them in their well-appointed little yacht, slipping
out of the Mohammed Ali Square, which was then under water and part of
the Eastern Harbour. Their faces are pale, partly from fasting, partly
from anticipation, for the passage can be rough in February. And their
mission was even more poignant than cotton. It concerned their faith.
Jews at Alexandria had been killed and teased, and some Gentiles had,
with the connivance of the Governor, erected a bronze chariot in their
principal synagogue—not even a new chariot, for the horses had no tails
or feet. It was a chariot once dedicated to—O Pollution!—Cleopatra.
There it stood, and the Jews did not like to throw it down. And into
their smaller synagogues, smaller objects, such as portraits of the
Emperor, had been thrust. It is a delicate matter to complain to an
Emperor about his own portrait, but Caligula was known to be a charming
and reasonable young man, and the deputation had been selected for its
tact.

As they crossed the harbour, the Temple of Cæsar stood out on the right,
so impressive, so brilliant, that Philo could not repress his enthusiasm
and recalled the view in after years.

    It is a piece incomparably above all others (he writes). It
    stands by a most commodious harbour, wonderfully high and large
    in proportion; an eminent sea mark: full of choice paintings and
    statues with donatives and oblatives in abundance; and then it
    is beautiful all over with gold and silver: the model curious
    and regular in the disposition of the parts, as galleries,
    libraries, porches, courts, halls, walks, and consecrated
    groves, as glorious as expense and art could make them, and
    everything in its proper place; besides that, the hope and
    comfort of seafaring men, either coming in or going out.

When would he see this temple as he came in? Although Cleopatra had
begun it for Antony, and Augustus finished it for himself, it filled him
with love, and he turned from it with reluctance to the coast on the
left, really more important, because Jehovah had translated the entire
Bible into Greek there. There stood those seventy huts! O wonder! It was
one of the anecdotes with which he hoped to rivet the attention of
Caligula, when they arrived at Rome.

That charming and reasonable young man had lately recovered from a
severe illness, at which the whole civilized world rejoiced, and the
Eternal City was full of embassies waiting to congratulate him. Among
these, ominously enough, was a counter-deputation from Alexandria,
strongly anti-Semite in tone. Philo watched it narrowly. The imperial
invalid did not arrive till August, and at first things went pleasantly
enough. He caught sight of the Jews one day as he was calling on his
mother, seemed transported with delight and waved his hand to them, also
sent a message that he would see them at once, but immediately left for
Naples, and they had to follow him thither.

It was somewhere between Naples and Baiæ that the little trip came to
its end. We cannot say where exactly, for the reason that the Emperor
received the deputation over a considerable space of ground. He was
continually on the trot throughout the audience, and they had to trot
after him. He passed from room to room and from villa to villa, all of
which, he told them, he had thrown open for their pleasure. They thanked
him and tried to say more. He trotted on. With him ran the
counter-deputation, and also a mob of concierges, housekeepers,
glaziers, plumbers, upholsterers and decorators, to whom he kept
flinging orders. At last he stopped. The Jews of Alexandria approached.
And with a voice of thunder he cried, “So you are the criminals who say
I am not a god.” It was shattering, it was appalling, it was the very
point they had hoped would not be raised. For they worshipped Jehovah
only. The counter-deputation shouted with delight, and the six Hebrew
gentlemen cried in unison, “Caligula! Caligula! do not be angry with us.
We have sacrificed for you not once but three times—first at your
accession, secondly when you were ill, thirdly when——” But the Emperor
interrupted them with merciless logic. “Exactly. For me and not to me,”
and dashed off to inspect the ladies’ apartments. After him they ran,
hopeless of removing Cleopatra’s chariot or of interesting him in the
Septuagint. They would be lucky if they secured their lives. He climbed
up to look at a ceiling. They climbed too. He ran along a plank; so did
the Jews. They did not speak, partly from lack of breath, partly because
they were afraid of his reply. At last, turning in their faces, he
asked, “Why don’t you eat pork?” The counter-deputation shouted again.
The Jews replied that different races ate different things, and one of
them, to carry off the situation, said some people didn’t eat lamb. “Of
course they don’t,” said the Emperor, “lamb is beastly.” The situation
grew worse. A fit of fury had seized Caligula at the thought of lamb and
he yelled, “What are your laws? I wish to know what your laws are!” They
began to tell him and he cried out, “Shut those windows,” and ran away
down a corridor. Then he turned with extraordinary gentleness and said,
“I beg your pardon, what were you saying?” They began to tell him of
their laws, and he said, “We’ll have all the old pictures hung together
here, I think.” Stopping anew, he looked round at his shattered train of
ambassadors and artisans, and smiling, remarked, “And these are the
people who think I am not a god. I don’t blame them. I merely pity them.
They can go.” Philo led his party back to Alexandria, there to meditate
on the accident that had so spoilt their little trip: Caligula was mad.

Yet did it signify—signify in the long run? The history of the Chosen
People is full of such contretemps, but they survive and thrive. Six
hundred years later, when Amr took the city, he found 40,000 Jews there.
And look at them in the railway carriage now. Their faces are anxious
and eloquent of past rebuffs. But they are travelling First.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA


When the assertions that were made at one time and another in the
uplands of Palestine descended from their home, and, taking the ancient
caravan route, crossed the River of Egypt and approached Alexandria,
they entered into a new spiritual atmosphere where they were obliged to
transform themselves or to perish. The atmosphere was not hostile to the
assertions, indeed it welcomed them, but it insisted that, however
unphilosophic they might be, they should wear the philosophic dress,
that they should take some account of the assertions that had arrived
previously, should recognize the existence of libraries and museums,
should approach with circumspection the souls of the rich. Under these
conditions they might remain. And exactly the same thing happened on two
distinct occasions. We are here concerned with the second of the
occasions, but it is convenient to glance at the first; it was soon
after Alexandria had been founded, and Jews were flocking to her
markets. An unexpected problem confronted them. Jehovah had said, “I Am
that I Am,” and so long as they remained in Palestine this seemed
enough. But now they had to face disquieting comments, such as “This
statement predicates existence merely,” or “This statement, while
professing merely to predicate existence, assumes the attribute of
speech,” and they grew aware of the inaccessibility and illogicality of
their national God. The result was a series of attempts on their part to
explain and recommend Jehovah to the Greeks—culminating in the great
system of Philo, who, by the doctrine of the Mediating Logos, ensured
that the deity should be at the same time accessible and inaccessible:
“The Logos,” he writes, “dwells on the margin between the Created and
the Increate, and delights to serve them both.” And there, for a little,
the matter rested.

But in Philo’s own lifetime a second assertion had been made among the
Judæan hills. We do not know its original form—too many minds have
worked over it since—but we know that it was unphilosophic and
anti-social. For it was addressed to the uneducated and it promised them
a kingdom. Following the usual route, it reached Alexandria, where the
same fate overtook it: it had to face comments, and in so doing was
transformed. It too evolved a system which, though not logical, paid the
lip service to logic that a great city demands, and interspersed bridges
of argument among the flights of faith. All Greek thinkers, except
Socrates, had done the same, so that, on its intellectual side, the new
religion did not break with the past; it consisted of an assertion in a
philosophic dress, and Clement of Alexandria, its first theologian, used
methods that were familiar to Philo two hundred years before. Not only
did he bring allegory to bear upon the more intractable passages of
Scripture, but he adapted the Philonian Logos and identified it with the
Founder of the new religion. “In the beginning was the Word and the Word
was with God.” Philo might have written this. St. John had added to it
two statements distinctly Christian, namely, “The Word was God” and “The
Word was made flesh.” And now Clement, taking over the completed
conception, raised upon it a storied fabric such as the Alexandrians
loved, and ensured that the deity should be at the same time accessible
and inaccessible, merciful and just, human and divine. The fabric would
have bewildered the fishermen of Galilee, and it had in it a flaw which
became evident in the fourth century and produced the Arian schism. But
it impressed the passing age; Clement, working in and through
Alexandria, did more than even St. Paul to recommend Christianity to the
Gentiles.

He was probably born in Greece about A.D. 150 and initiated into
Mysteries there. Then he was converted and became head of the
theological college in Alexandria, where he remained until his exile in
202. But little is known of his life and nothing of his character,
though one may assume it was conciliatory: Christianity was not yet
official, and thus in no position to fulminate. Of his treatises the
“Exhortation to the Greeks” acknowledges several merits in pagan
thought, while “The Rich Man’s Salvation” handles with delicacy a
problem on which business men are naturally sensitive, and arrives at
the comforting conclusion that Christ did not mean what He said. One
recognizes the wary resident. And when he attacks Paganism he seldom
denounces: he mocks, knowing this to be the better way. For the age is
literal. It had lost resilience and spring, and if one pointed out to it
that Zeus had behaved absurdly in Homer, it could summon no rush of
instinct or of poetry with which to defend his worship. Demeter too! And
shrines to the sneezing Apollo and to the gouty and to the coughing
Artemis! Ha! Ha! Fancy believing in a goddess with the gout. Clement
makes great play with such nonsense. For a new religion has, as far as
persiflage is concerned, an advantage over an old one: it has not had
time itself to evolve a mythology, and his adversaries could not retort
with references to St. Simeon Stylites, or to the plague spot of St.
Roch, or to St. Fina who allowed a devil to throw her mother down the
stairs. They could only hang their heads and assent, and when Clement
derided the priests in the idol-temples for their dirt, they could not
foresee that in the following century dirt would be recommended as holy
by the Church. They were caught by his genial air and by his “logic”;
there is nothing morose about the treatises, and even to-day they are
readable, though not quite in the way that the author intended.

    A solemn assembly of Greeks, held in honour of a dead serpent,
    was gathering at Pytho, and Eunomus sang a funeral ode for the
    reptile. Whether his song was a hymn in praise of the snake or a
    lamentation over it, I cannot say; but there was a competition
    and Eunomus was playing the lyre in the heat of the day, at the
    time when the grasshoppers, warmed by the sun, were singing
    under the leaves along the hills. They were singing, you see,
    not to the dead serpent of Pytho, but to the all-wise God, a
    spontaneous song, better than the measured strains of Eunomus. A
    string breaks in the Locrian’s hands; the grasshopper settles
    upon the neck of the lyre and begins to twitter there as if upon
    a branch: whereupon the minstrel, by adapting his music to the
    grasshopper’s lay, supplied the place of the missing string. So
    it was not Eunomus that drew the grasshopper by his song, as the
    legend would have it, when it set up the bronze figure at Pytho,
    showing Eunomus with his lyre and his ally in the contest. No,
    the grasshopper flew of its own accord, and sang of its own
    accord, although the Greeks thought it to have been responsive
    to music.

    How in the world is it that you have given credence to worthless
    legends, imagining....

and blasts of theology ensue. But how grateful one is to Clement for
mentioning the grasshopper, and how probable it seems, from the way he
tells the story, that he had a faint consciousness of its beauty—just as
his risqué passages emanate a furtive consciousness of their riskiness.
His learning is immense: he is said to allude to three hundred Greek
writers of whom we should not otherwise have heard, and one gladly
follows him through the back-yards of the Classical world. The results
of his ramble are most fully stated in two other of his treatises, the
“Rug roll” and the “Tutor.” His verdict is that, though the poetry of
Hellas is false and its cults absurd or vile, yet its philosophers and
grasshoppers possessed a certain measure of divine truth; some of the
speculations of Plato, for instance, had been inspired by the Psalms. It
is not much of a verdict in the light of modern research; but it is a
moderate verdict for a Father; he spares his thunders, he does not exalt
asceticism, he is never anti-social.

    Till the ground if you are a husbandman; but recognize God in
    your husbandry. Sail the sea, you who love sea-faring; but ever
    call upon the heavenly pilot. Were you a soldier on campaign
    when the knowledge of God laid hold of you? Then listen to the
    commander who signals righteousness.

Here he shows his respect for the existing fabric and his hope that it
may pass without catastrophe from Pagan to Christian, a hope that could
have found expression only at Alexandria, where contending assertions
have so often been harmonized, and whose own god, Serapis, had expressed
the union of Egypt and Greece.

Looking back—it is so easy now to look back!—one can see that the hope
was vain. Christianity, though she contained little that was fresh
doctrinally, yet descended with a double-edged sword that hacked the
ancient world to pieces. For she had declared war against two great
forces—Sex and the State—and during her complicated contest with them
the old order was bound to disappear. The contest had not really begun
in Clement’s day. Sex disquieted him, but he did not revolt against it
like his successor Origen. The State exiled him, but it had not yet put
forth, as it did under Diocletian, its full claims to divinity. He lived
in a period of transition, and in Alexandria. And in that curious city,
which had never been young and hoped never to grow old, conciliation
must have seemed more possible than elsewhere, and the graciousness of
Greece not quite incompatible with the Grace of God.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             ST. ATHANASIUS


                                   I

That afternoon was one of comparative calm for the infant Church. She
was three hundred and ten years old. The pagan persecutions had ceased,
and disputes about the Nature of Christ, over which blood was more
freely to flow, had not yet matured. It still seemed that under her
inspired guidance the old world would pass without disaster into the
new. What lovely weather! The month was June, and the beacon of smoke
that rose from the summit of the Pharos was inclined over Alexandria by
a northerly wind. Both harbours were filled with ships; the Eastern
Harbour was lined with palaces. The Western Harbour—and to it we must
turn—was indeed less splendid. Then, as now, it washed the business
quarter, the warehouses, the slums where the dock hands lived. Hardness
and poverty edged it as they do to-day, and Christianity had settled
here early, as she settled on all spots where the antique civilization
had failed to make men dignified. Issuing out of the Gate of the Moon,
the great Canopic Way here lost its straightness and split into ignoble
lanes. There was only one redeeming feature—a house in which a real
bishop was sitting. His name was Alexander. He has invited some
clergymen to lunch, and they are late.

Bishops existed then in a profusion we can scarcely conceive. Every
large village produced one, and they even went so far as to disorganize
the postal service by galloping about in troops upon the government
horses. But he of Alexandria was a bishop of no ordinary brand. He bore
the title of “Patriarch of all the Preaching of St. Mark,” and a
prestige that only Rome challenged. If he lived in these slums, it was
because historical associations detained him. The sainted shoemaker
Annianus had plied his trade hard by. A church to the right—St.
Theonas’—had been built by another local saint. Here were the origins of
his power, but its field lay elsewhere—eastward among the splendours of
the town; southward, hundreds of miles southward, up the valley of the
Nile. The whole of Egypt was ripe for Christianity. A magnificent prize!

The waters of the harbour, placid and slightly stale, came almost up to
his house. He gazed at them, and at the grubby beach where some little
boys were playing. They were playing at going to church. They were poor,
they had no toys, and, since railway trains did not exist, going to
church was the only game they could command. Indeed, it is a fascinating
game. Even Anglican nurseries have succumbed to it. Scantily robed, they
processed and inclined, and the Bishop, being not Anglican, but African,
only smiled. Boys will be boys! He was specially diverted by their
leader, a skinny but sportive youth, who would take his flock for a swim
and, diving, reappear when and where they least expected. Then more
solemn thoughts returned.

The whole of Egypt was ripe for Christianity. Ah, but for what kind of
Christianity? That was the trouble. Fancy if, with Arius, it adopted the
heresy of “Time was when He was not”! Fancy if it paltered with
Gnosticism, and believed that creation, with its palaces and slums, is
the result of a muddle! Fancy if it Judaized with Meletius, the
disobedient Bishop of Assiout! Alexander had written to Meletius, asking
him to Judaize less, but had had no reply. That was the disadvantage of
a copious episcopy. You could never be sure that all the bishops would
do the same thing. And there were dreadful examples in which flighty
laymen had lost their heads, and, exclaiming, “Me be bishop too!” had
run away into the desert before any one could stop them. The Emperor
Constantine (that lion-hearted warrior!) was a further anxiety.
Constantine so easily got mixed. Immersed in his town-planning, he might
stamp some heresy as official and then the provinces would take it up.
How difficult everything was! What was to be done? Perhaps the
clergymen, when they arrived for lunch, would know. There used to be too
little Christianity. Now there almost seemed too much. Alexander sighed,
and looked over the harbour to the Temple of Neptune that stood on the
promontory. He was growing old. Where was his successor?—someone who ...
not exactly saintliness and scholarship, but someone who would codify,
would define?

Stop! stop! Boys will be boys, but there are limits. They were playing
at Baptism now, and the sportive youth was in the act of pouring some of
the harbour water over two other Gippoes. To enter into the Bishop’s
alarm we must remember the difference between Northern and Southern
conceptions of impiety. To the Northerner impiety is bad taste. To the
Southerner it is magic—the illicit and accurate performance of certain
acts, and especially of sacramental acts. If the youth had made any
mistake in his baptismal ritual it would not have mattered, it would
have remained play. But he was performing accurately what he had no
right to perform; he was saying, “Me be bishop too,” and Heaven alone
knew the theological consequences. “Stop! stop!” the genuine article
cried. It was too late. The water fell, the trick was done ... and at
the same moment the clergymen arrived, offering such apologies for their
unpunctuality as are usual among Egyptians.

It was long before lunch was served. The culprits were summoned, and in
terrific conclave their conduct was discussed. There was some hope that
the two converts were Christians already, in which case nothing would
have been affected. But no. They had bowed the knee to Neptune hitherto.
Then were they Christians now? Or were they horrid little demons who,
outside or inside the Church, would harm her equally? The sportive youth
prevailed. He won over the Bishop, and calmed the clergymen’s fears, and
before evening fell and the smoke on the Pharos turned to a column of
fire, it was settled that he had by his play rendered two souls eligible
for immortal bliss. And his action had a more immediate consequence: he
never washed again. Taken into the Bishop’s house, he became his pupil,
his deacon, his coadjutor, his successor in the see, and finally a saint
and a doctor of the Church: he is St. Athanasius.


                                   II

At the other end of the city there lived another clergyman. His name was
Arius, and it was a very long time indeed since the Bishop had asked him
to lunch. He took duty at St. Mark’s, a small church that stood on the
brink of the Mediterranean. The neighbourhood was of the best—palaces,
zoological gardens, lecture-rooms, etc.—and over some trees rose the
long back of the temple that Cleopatra had built to Antony. That temple
would make a seemly cathedral, Arius often thought, and the obelisks in
its forecourt—Cleopatra’s Needles—would be improved if they supported
statues of God the Father. The whole of Egypt was ripe for
Christianity—for the right kind of Christianity, that is to say: not for
the kind that was preached at the western end of the town.

Arius was elderly by now. Learned and sincere, tall, simple in his
dress, persuasive in his manner, he was accused by his enemies of
looking like a snake and of seducing, in the theological sense, seven
hundred virgins. The accusation amazed him. He had only preached what is
obviously true. Since Christ is the Son of God, it follows that Christ
is younger than God, and that there must have been a condition—no doubt
before time began—when the first Person of the Trinity existed, and the
Second did not. This has only to be stated to be believed, and only
those who were entirely possessed by the devil, like doddering Alexander
and slippery Athanasius, would state the contrary. The Emperor
Constantine (that lion-hearted warrior!) would certainly see the point,
provided it was explained to him. But Constantine so easily got mixed,
and there was indeed a danger that he would stamp the wrong type of
Christianity as official, and plunge the world into heresy for thousands
of years. How difficult everything was! One’s immediate duty was to
testify, so day after day Arius preached Arianism to the seven hundred
virgins, to the corpse of the Evangelist St. Mark who lay buried beneath
the church, and to the bright blue waves of the sea that in their
ceaseless advance have now covered the whole scene.

The quarrel between him and his bishop grew so fierce and spread so far
that Constantine was obliged to intervene and to beg his
fellow-Christians to imitate the Greek philosophers, who could differ
without shedding one another’s blood. It was just the sort of appeal
that everyone had been fearing that the Emperor would make. He was
insufficiently alive to eternal truth. No one obeyed, and in desperation
he summoned them to meet him at Nicæa on the Black Sea, and spent the
interval in trying to find out what their quarrel turned on. Two hundred
and fifty bishops attended, many priests, deacons innumerable. Among the
last named was Athanasius, who, thundering against Arius in full
conclave, procured his overthrow. Amid scenes of incredible violence the
Nicene Creed was passed, containing clauses (since omitted) in which
Arianism was anathematized. Arius was banished. Athanasius led his
tottering but triumphant bishop back to Alexandria, and the Emperor
returned to the town-planning and to the wardrobes of wigs and false
hair that sometimes solace the maturity of a military man.

The powers of Athanasius were remarkable. Like Arius, he knew what truth
is, but, being a politician, he knew how truth can best be enforced; his
career blends subtlety with vigour, self-abnegation with craft.
Physically he was blackish, but active and strong. One recognizes a
modern street type. Not one single generous action by him is recorded,
but he knew how to inspire enthusiasm, and before he died had become a
popular hero and set the pace to his century. Soon after his return from
Nicæa he was made Patriarch of Alexandria, but he had scarcely sat down
before Arius was back there too. The Emperor wished it. Could not
Christians imitate, etc...? No; Christians could not and would not; and
Athanasius testified with such vigour that he was banished in his turn,
and his dusty theological Odyssey begins. He was banished in all five
times. Sometimes he hid in a cistern, or in pious ladies’ houses, or in
the recesses of the Libyan desert; at other times, going farther afield,
he popped up in Palestine or France. Roused by his passage from older
visions, the soul of the world began to stir, and to what activity!
Heavy Romans, dreamy Orientals and quick Greeks all turned to theology,
and scrambled for the machinery of the Pagan State, wrenching this way
and that until their common heritage was smashed. Cleopatra’s temple to
Antony first felt the killing glare of truth. Arians and Orthodox
competed for its consecration, and in the space of six years its back
was broken and its ribs cracked by fire. St. Theonas’—the episcopal
church—was gutted, and Athanasius nearly killed by some soldiers on its
altar. And all the time everyone was writing—encyclicals as to the date
of Easter, animadversions against washing, accusations of sorcery,
complaints that Athanasius had broken a chalice in a church in a village
near Lake Mariout, replies that there was no chalice to break, because
there was no church, because there was no village—reams and reams of
paper on this subject travelling over the empire for years, and being
perused by bishops in Mesopotamia and Spain. Constantine died; but his
successors, whatever their faith, were drawn into the dance of theology,
none more so than Julian, who dreamed of Olympus. Arius died, falling
down in the streets of Alexandria one evening while he was talking to a
friend; but Arianism survived. Athanasius died too; but not before he
had weaned the Church from her traditions of scholarship and tolerance,
the tradition of Clement and Origen. Few divines have done more for her,
and her gratitude has been both profound and characteristic; she has
coupled his name to a Creed with which he had nothing to do—the
Athanasian.

Were his activities all about nothing? No! The Arian controversy
enshrined a real emotion. By declaring that Christ was younger than God
Arius tended to make him lower than God, and consequently to bring him
nearer to man—indeed, to level him into a mere good man and to forestall
Unitarianism. This appealed to the untheologically-minded—to Emperors,
and particularly to Empresses. It made them feel less lonely. But
Athanasius, who viewed the innovation with an expert eye, saw that while
it popularized Christ it isolated God, and raised man no nearer to
heaven in the long run. Therefore he fought it. Of the theatre of this
ancient strife no trace remains in Alexandria. Not even Cleopatra’s
Needle stands there now. But the strife still continues in the heart of
men, ever prone to substitute the human for the divine, and it is
probable that many an individual Christian to-day is an Arian without
knowing it.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            TIMOTHY THE CAT
                        AND TIMOTHY WHITEBONNET


“Miaou!”

Such was the terrible sound which, half way through the fifth century,
disturbed the slumbers of certain Monophysite monks. Their flesh crept.
Moved by a common impulse, each stole from his cell, and saw, in the
dimly lighted corridor, a figure even more mysterious than
pussy’s—something that gibbered and bowed and said, in hollow and
sepulchral tones, “Consecrate Timothy.” They stood motionless until the
figure disappeared, then ran this way and that in search of it. There
was nothing to be seen. They opened the convent doors. Nothing to be
seen except Alexandria glimmering, still entirely marble; nothing except
the Pharos, still working and sending out from the height of five
hundred feet a beam visible over a radius of seventy miles. The streets
were quiet, owing to the absence of the Greek garrison in Upper Egypt.
Having looked at the tedious prospect, the monks withdrew, for much had
to be done before morning: they had to decide whether it was an angel or
a devil who had said “Miaou.” If the former, they must do penance for
their lack of faith; if the latter, they were in danger of hell-fire.
While they argued over a point that has puzzled the sharpest of saints,
the attention of some of them began to wander, and to dwell on one who
was beyond doubt a devil—Proterius, whom the Emperor had imposed on them
as their Patriarch, and who slept in a convent hard by. They cursed
Proterius. They reflected too that in the absence of the garrison he no
longer slept safely, that they were Egyptians and numerous, he a Greek
and alone. They cursed him again, and the apparition reappeared
repeating, “Consecrate Timothy.” Timothy was one of their own number and
the holiest of men. When, after an interval, they ran to his cell, they
found him upon his knees in prayer. They told him of the ghostly
message, and he seemed dazed, but on collecting himself implored that it
might never be mentioned again. Asked whether it was infernal, he
refused to reply. Asked whether it was supernal, he replied, “You, not
I, have said so.” All doubts disappeared, and away they ran to find some
bishops. Melchite or Arian or Sabæan or Nestorian or Donatist or
Manichæan bishops would not do: they must be Monophysite. Fortunately
two had occurred, and on the following day Timothy, struggling piously,
was carried between Cleopatra’s Needles into the cathedral and
consecrated Patriarch of Alexandria and of all the Preaching of St.
Mark. For he held the correct opinion as to the Nature of Christ—the
only possible opinion: Christ has a single Nature, divine, which has
absorbed the human: how could it be otherwise? The leading residential
officials, the municipal authorities, and the business community thought
the same; so, attacking Proterius, who thought the contrary, they
murdered him in the Baptistery, and hanged him over the city wall. The
Greek garrison hurried back, but it was too late. Proterius had gone,
nor did the soldiers regret him, for he had made more work than most
bishops, having passed the seven years of his episcopate in a constant
state of siege. Timothy, for whom no guards need be set, was a great
improvement. Diffident and colloquial, he won everyone’s heart, and
obtained, for some reason or other, the surname of the Cat.

Thus the _coup d’église_ had succeeded for the moment. But it had to
reckon with another monk, a second Timothy, of whom, as events proved,
the angel had really been thinking. He was Timothy Whitebonnet, so
called from his headgear, and his life was more notable than the Cat’s,
for he lived at Canopus, where the air is so thick with demons that only
the most robust of Christians can breathe. Canopus stood on a promontory
ten miles east of Alexandria, overlooking the exit of the Nile. Foul
influences had haunted it from the first. Helen, a thousand years ago,
had come here with Paris on their flight towards Troy, and though the
local authorities had expelled her for vagabondage, the ship that
carried her might still be seen, upon summer nights, ploughing the waves
into fire. In her train had followed Herodotus, asking idle questions of
idle men; Alexander, called the Great from his enormous horns; and
Serapis, a devil worse than any, who, liking the situation, had summoned
his wife and child and established them on a cliff to the north, within
sound of the sea. The child never spoke. The wife wore the moon. In
their honour the Alexandrians used to come out along the canal in barges
and punts, crowned with flowers, robed in gold, and singing spells of
such potency that the words remained, though the singers were dead, and
would slide into Timothy Whitebonnet’s ear, when the air seemed
stillest, and pretend to him that they came from God. Often, just as a
sentence was completed, he would realize its origin, and have to
expectorate it in the form of a toad—a dangerous exercise, but it taught
him discernment, and fitted him to play his part in the world. He
learned with horror of the riots in the metropolis, and of the elevation
of the heretical Cat. For he knew that Christ has two Natures, one
human, the other divine: how can it be otherwise?

At Constantinople there seems to have been a little doubt. Leo, the
reigning emperor, was anxious not to drive Egypt into revolt, and
disposed to let Alexandria follow the faith she preferred. But his
theologians took a higher line, and insisted on his sending a new
garrison. This was done, the Cat was captured, and Whitebonnet dragged
from Canopus and consecrated in his place. There matters rested until
the accession of Basiliscus, who sent a new garrison to expel
Whitebonnet. Once more the Cat ruled bloodily until the Emperor Zeno
took the other view, and sending a——

However, the curtain may drop now. The controversy blazed for two
hundred years, and is smouldering yet. The Copts still believe, with
Timothy the Cat, in the single Nature of Christ; the double Nature,
upheld by Timothy Whitebonnet, is still maintained by the rest of
Christendom and by the reader. The Pharos, the Temple of Serapis—these
have perished, being only stones, and sharing the impermanence of
material things. It is ideas that live.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        THE GOD ABANDONS ANTONY


 When at the hour of midnight
 an invisible choir is suddenly heard passing
 with exquisite music, with voices—
 Do not lament your fortune that at last subsides,
 your life’s work that has failed, your schemes that have proved
    illusions.
 But like a man prepared, like a brave man,
 bid farewell to her, to Alexandria who is departing.
 Above all, do not delude yourself, do not say that it is a dream,
 that your ear was mistaken.
 Do not condescend to such empty hopes.
 Like a man for long prepared, like a brave man,
 like the man who was worthy of such a city,
 go to the window firmly,
 and listen with emotion
 but not with the prayers and complaints of the coward
 (Ah! supreme rapture!)
 listen to the notes, to the exquisite instruments of the mystic choir,
 and bid farewell to her, to Alexandria whom you are losing.

                                                        C. P. CAVAFY.[1]

Footnote 1:

  For a study of Cavafy’s work see p. 91.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               PHARILLON




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             ELIZA IN EGYPT


                                   I

When the lively and somewhat spiteful Mrs. Eliza Fay landed at
Alexandria in the summer of 1779 that city was at her lowest ebb. The
glories of the antique had gone, the comforts of the modern had not
arrived. Gone were the temples and statues, gone the palace of Cleopatra
and the library of Callimachus, the Pharos had fallen and been succeeded
by the feeble Pharillon, the Heptastadion had silted up; while the
successors to these—the hotels, the clubs, the drainage system, the
exquisite Municipal buildings—still slept in the unastonished womb of
time.

Attached to Mrs. Fay was her husband, an incompetent advocate, who was
to make their fortunes in the East. Since the boat that had brought them
was owned by a Christian, they were forbidden to enter the Western
Harbour, and had to disembark not far from the place where, in more
enlightened days, the Ramleh Tramway was to terminate. All was barbarism
then, save for two great obelisks, one prone, one erect—“Cleopatra’s
Needles,” not yet transferred to New York and London respectively. They
were met in this lonely spot by the Prussian Consul, a certain Mr.
Brandy, who found them rooms, but had bad news for them: “a melancholy
story,” as Mrs. Fay calls it when writing to her sister. Between Cairo
and Suez, on the very route they proposed to take, a caravan had been
held up and some of its passengers murdered. She was pitiably agitated.
But she did not give up her sight-seeing; she had got to Alexandria and
meant to enjoy it. Cleopatra’s Needles in the first place. What did the
hieroglyphics on them signify? She applied to Mr. Brandy; but the
Consul, following the best traditions of the residential Levant, “seemed
to know no more than ourselves.” His kindness was unfailing. Next day he
produced donkeys—being Christians they were not allowed to ride
horses—and the party trotted over three miles of desert to Pompey’s
Pillar, preceded by a janissary with a drawn sword. Pompey’s Pillar
arouses few emotions in the modern breast. The environs are squalid, the
turnstile depressing, and one knows that it dates not from Pompey but
from Diocletian. Mrs. Fay approached it in a nobler mood.

    Although quite unadorned, the proportions are so exquisite that
    it must strike every beholder with a kind of awe, which softens
    into melancholy when one reflects that the renowned hero, whose
    name it bears, was treacherously murdered on this very coast by
    the boatmen who were conveying him to Alexandria. His wretched
    wife stood on the vessel he had just left, watching his
    departure, as we may very naturally suppose, with inexpressible
    anxiety. What must have been her agonies at the dreadful event!

The time was to come when Mrs. Fay herself would have watched with very
little anxiety the murder of Mr. Fay. Her Anthony—for such was his
name—led her from mess to mess, and in the end she had to divorce him.
Let us turn from these serious themes to a “ludicrous accident” that
befell Mr. Brandy on the way to “Cleopatra’s Palace.” He was very large
and stout, and his donkey, seizing its opportunity, stole away from
under the consular seat and left him astride on the sand! As for
“Cleopatra’s Palace,” it was not the genuine palace, but it was as
genuine as the emotion it inspired.

    Never do I remember being so affected by a like object. I stood
    in the midst of the ruins, meditating on the awful scene, till I
    could have almost fancied I beheld its former mistress,
    revelling in luxury with her infatuated lover, Mark Anthony, who
    for her sake lost all.

An account of a party at the Brandies’ concludes the letter—a clear-cut
malicious account. Eliza is the child of her century, which affected
lofty emotions but whose real interest lay in little things, and in
satire.

    We were most graciously received by Mrs. Brandy, who is a native
    of this place; but as she could speak a little Italian we
    managed to carry on something like a conversation. She was most
    curiously bedizened on the occasion, and being short,
    dark-complexioned, and of a complete dumpling shape, appeared
    altogether the strangest lump of finery I ever beheld. She had a
    handkerchief bound round her head, covered with strings composed
    of spangles, but very large, intermixed with pearls and
    emeralds; her neck and bosom were ornamented in the same way.
    Add to all this an embroidered girdle with a pair of gold
    clasps, I think very nearly four inches square, enormous
    ear-rings, and a large diamond sprig at the top of her forehead,
    and you must allow that she was a most brilliant figure. They
    have a sweet little girl about seven years of age, who was
    decked out in much the same style; but she really looked pretty
    in spite of her incongruous finery. On the whole, though, I was
    pleased with both mother and child; their looks and behaviour
    were kind, and to a stranger in a strange land (and this is
    literally so to us) a little attention is soothing and
    consolatory; especially when one feels surrounded by
    hostilities, which every European must do here. Compared with
    the uncouth beings who govern this country, I felt at home among
    the natives of France, and I will even say of Italy.

    On taking leave, our host presented a book containing
    certificates of his great politeness and attentions towards
    travellers, which were signed by many persons of consideration,
    and at the same time requesting that Mr. Fay and myself would
    add our names to the list. We complied, though not without
    surprise that a gentleman in his situation should have recourse
    to such an expedient, which cannot but degrade him in the eyes
    of his guests.

Rather cattish, that last remark, considering how much the Consul had
done for her. But a cat she is—spirited and observant, but a cat.


                                   II

Heedless of the weather, heedless of the rumour of plundered caravans,
Eliza removed her husband as soon as possible for the interior, and some
account must now be given of their adventures. Her pen is our guide.
Through flood and blood it keeps its way, curbed only by her fear of the
Turkish Censor, and by her desire to conceal her forebodings from
friends at home. As soon as misfortunes have occurred she will describe
them. But about the future she is always confident and bright, and this
gallant determination to make the best of trouble gives charm to a
character that is otherwise unsympathetic.

The Fays selected the river route. Since the Mahmoudieh Canal had not
been cut, they had to reach the Rosetta mouth of the Nile by sea. They
were nearly drowned crossing its bar, and scarcely were they through
when a boat of thieves shot out from the bank and caused Mr. Fay to fire
off two pistols at once. They outsailed their pursuers, and sped up the
lower reach to Rosetta, then a more important place than Alexandria and
apparently a tidier place. Eliza was delighted. Thoughts of England and
of the English Bible at once welled up in her mind.

    There is an appearance of cleanliness in Rosetta, the more
    gratifying because seldom met with in any degree so as to remind
    us of what we are accustomed to at home. The landscape around
    was interesting from its novelty, and became peculiarly so on
    considering it as the country where the children of Israel
    sojourned. The beautiful, I may say the unparalleled story of
    Joseph and his brethren rose to my mind as I surveyed these
    banks on which the Patriarch sought shelter for his old age,
    where his self-convicted sons bowed down before their younger
    brother, and I almost felt as if in a dream, so wonderful
    appeared the circumstance of my being here.

It is news that Jacob ever resided in the province of Behera. Passing by
this, and by the Pyramids which they only saw from a distance, we
accompany the Fays to Boulac, “the port of Grand Cairo,” where their
troubles increased. Restrictions against Christians being even severer
here than at Alexandria, Mrs. Fay had to dress as a native before she
might enter the city. “I had in the first place a pair of trousers with
yellow leather half-boots and slippers over them”; then a long satin
gown, another gown with short sleeves, a robe of silk like a surplice,
muslin from her forehead to her feet, and over everything a piece of
black silk. “Thus equipped, stumbling at every step, I sallied forth,
and with great difficulty got across my noble beast; but as the veil
prevented me breathing freely I must have died by the way.” She rode
into the European enclave where terror and confusion greeted her. The
rumour about the caravan proved only too true. Complete details had just
arrived. It had been plundered between Cairo and Suez, its passengers
had been killed or left to die in the sun, and, worse still, the Turkish
authorities were so upset by the scandal that they proposed murdering
the whole of the European community in case the news leaked out. It was
thought that Mrs. Fay might be safe with an Italian doctor. As she
waddled across to his house her veil slipped down so that a passer
reprimanded her severely for indecency. Also she fell ill.

    There broke out a severe epidemical disease with violent
    symptoms. People are attacked at a moment’s warning with
    dreadful pains in stiff limbs, a burning fever with delirium and
    a total stoppage of perspiration. During two days it increases,
    on the third there comes on uniformly a profuse sweat (pardon
    the expression) with vomiting which carries all off.

But as soon as her disease culminated, out she sallied to see the
ceremonies connected with the rise of the Nile. They disappointed and
disgusted her.

    Not a decent person could I distinguish among the whole group.
    So much for this grand exhibition, which we have abundant cause
    to wish had not taken place, for the vapours arising from such a
    mass of impurity have rendered the heat more intolerable than
    ever. My bedchamber overlooks the canal, so that I enjoy the
    full benefit to be derived from its proximity.

Events by now were taking a calmer turn. Mr. Fay, who had also had the
epidemic, was restored to such vitality as he possessed, and the Turkish
authorities had been persuaded by a bribe of £3000 to overcome their
sensitiveness and to leave the European colony alive. The terrible
journey remained, but beyond it lay India and perhaps a fortune.


                                  III

The Suez caravan—an immense affair—was formed up in the outskirts of
Cairo. In view of the recent murders it included a large guard, and the
journey, which took three days, passed off without disaster. Mr. Fay had
a horse; Eliza, still panting in her Oriental robes, travelled in a
litter insecurely hung between two restive camels. Peeping out through
its blinds she could see the sun and the rocks by day, and the stars by
night. She notes their beauty, her senses seem sharpened by danger, and
she was to look back on the desert with a hint of romance. Above her
head, attached to the roof of the litter, were water-bottles, melons,
and hard-boiled eggs, her provision for the road, rumbling and crashing
together to the grave disturbance of her sleep. “Once I was saluted by a
parcel of hard eggs breaking loose from their net and pelting me
completely. It was fortunate that they were boiled, or I should have
been in a pretty trim.” By her side rode her husband, and near him was a
melancholy figure, followed by a sick greyhound, young Mr. Taylor, who
became so depressed by the heat that he slid off his horse and asked to
be allowed to die. His request was refused, as was his request that she
should receive the greyhound into her litter. Eliza was ever sensible.
She was not going to be immured with a boiling hot dog which might bite
her. “I hope no person will accuse me of inhumanity for refusing to
receive an animal in that condition: self-preservation forbade my
compliance; I felt that it would be weakness instead of compassion to
subject myself to such a risk.” Consequently the greyhound died. An Arab
despatched him with his scimitar, Mr. Taylor protested, the Arab ran at
Mr. Taylor. “You may judge from this incident what wretches we were cast
among.”

They found a boat at Suez and went on board at once. Mr. Fay writes a
line to his father-in-law to tell him that they are safe thus far: a
grandiose little line:

    Some are now very ill, but I stood it as well as any Arabian in
    the caravan, which consisted of at least five thousand people.
    My wife insists on taking the pen out of my hands.

She takes it, to the following effect:

    My dear Friends—I have not a moment’s time, for the boat is
    waiting, therefore can only beg that you will unite with me in
    praising our Heavenly Protector for our escape from the various
    dangers of our journey. I never could have thought my
    constitution was so strong. I bore the fatigues of the desert
    like a lion. We have been pillaged of almost everything by the
    Arabs. This is the Paradise of thieves, I think the whole
    population may be divided into two classes of them: those who
    adopt force and those who effect their purpose by fraud.... I
    have not another moment. God bless you! Pray for me, my beloved
    friends.

It is not clear when the Fays had been pillaged, or of what; perhaps
they had merely suffered the losses incidental to an Oriental
embarkation. The ship herself had been pillaged, and badly. She had been
connected with the earlier caravan—the ill-fated one—and the Government
had gutted her in its vague embarrassment. Not a chair, not a table was
left. Still they were thankful to be on board. Their cabin was good, the
captain appeared good-natured and polite, and their fellow-passengers, a
Mr. and Mrs. Tulloch, a Mr. Hare, a Mr. Fuller, and a Mr. Manesty,
seemed, together with poor Mr. Taylor from the caravan, to promise
inoffensive companionship down the Red Sea. Calm was the prospect. But
Eliza is Eliza. And we have not yet seen Eliza in close contact with
another lady. Nor have we yet seen Mrs. Tulloch.


                                   IV

The beauty of the Gulf of Suez—and surely it is most beautiful—has never
received full appreciation from the traveller. He is in too much of a
hurry to arrive or to depart, his eyes are too ardently bent on England
or on India for him to enjoy that exquisite corridor of tinted mountains
and radiant water. He is too much occupied with his own thoughts to
realize that here, here and nowhere else, is the vestibule between the
Levant and the Tropics. Nor was it otherwise in the case of Mrs. Fay. As
she sailed southward with her husband in the pleasant autumn weather,
her thoughts dwelt on the past with irritation, on the future with hope,
but on the scenery scarcely at all. What with the boredom of Alexandria,
what with her fright at Cairo, what with the native dress that
fanaticism had compelled her to wear (“a terrible fashion for one like
me to whom fresh air seems the greatest requisite for existence”), and
finally what with Suez, which she found “a miserable place little better
than the desert which it bounds,” she quitted Egypt without one tender
word. Even her Biblical reminiscences take an embittered turn. She
forgets how glad Jacob had been to come there and only remembers how
anxious Moses and Aaron had been to get away.

Content to have escaped, she turns her gaze within—not of course to her
own interior (she is no morbid analyst) but to the interior of the boat,
and surveys with merciless eyes her fellow-passengers. The letter that
describes them exhibits her talent, her vitality, and her trust in
Providence, and incidentally explains why she never became popular, and
why “two parties,” as she terms them, were at once formed on board, the
one party consisting of her husband and herself, the other of everyone
else. The feud, trivial at the time, was not to be without serious
consequences. “You will now expect me, my dear friends,” she begins, “to
say something of those with whom we are cooped up, but my account will
not be very satisfactory, though sufficiently interesting to us—to being
there.”

The grammar is hazy. But the style makes all clear.

    The woman Mrs. Tulloch, of whom I entertained some suspicion
    from the first, is, now I am credibly informed, one of the very
    lowest creatures taken off the streets in London. She is so
    perfectly depraved in disposition that her supreme delight
    consists in making everybody about her miserable. It would be
    doing her too much honour to stain my paper with a detail of the
    various artifices she daily practises to that end. Her pretended
    husband, having been in India before and giving himself many
    airs, is looked upon as a person of mighty consequence whom no
    one chooses to offend. Therefore madam has full scope to
    exercise her mischievous talents, wherein he never controls her,
    not but that he perfectly understands to make himself feared.
    Coercive measures are sometimes resorted to. It is a common
    expression of the lady, “Lord bless you, if I did such or such a
    thing, Tulloch would make no more ado, but knock me down like an
    ox.” I frequently amuse myself with examining their
    countenances, where ill-nature has fixed her empire so firmly
    that I scarcely believe either of them smiled except
    maliciously.

    As for the captain he is a mere Jack in office. Being
    unexpectedly raised to that post from second mate by the death
    of poor Captain Vanderfield and his chief officer on the fatal
    Desert, he has become from this circumstance so insolent and
    overbearing that everyone detests him. Instead of being ready to
    accommodate every person with the few necessaries left by the
    plundering Arabs, he constantly appropriates them to himself.
    “Where is the captain’s silver spoon? God bless my soul, Sir,
    you have got my chair; must you be seated before the captain’s
    glass?” and a great deal more of this same kind; but this may
    serve as a specimen. And although the wretch half starves us, he
    frequently makes comparisons between his table and that of an
    Indiaman which we dare not contradict while in his power.

Food is a solemn subject. Eliza was not a fastidious or an insular eater
and she would gladly sample the dishes of foreign climes. But she did
demand that those dishes should be plentiful, and that they should
nourish her, and loud are her complaints when they do not, and vigorous
the measures she takes.

    During the first fortnight of our voyage my foolish complaisance
    stood in my way at table, but I soon learned our gentle maxim,
    catch as catch can. The longest arm fared best, and you cannot
    imagine what a good scrambler I have become. A dish once seized,
    it is my care to make use of my good fortune; and now provisions
    running very short, we are grown quite savages: two or three of
    us perhaps fighting for a bone, for there is no respect of
    persons. The wretch of a captain, wanting our passage money for
    nothing, refused to lay in a sufficient quantity of stock; and
    if we do not soon reach our port, what must be the consequence,
    Heaven knows.

Mr. Hare, Eliza’s chief gentleman enemy, was not dangerous at meals. It
was rather the activity of his mind that threatened her. Whenever she
writes of him, her pen is at its sharpest, it is indeed not so much a
pen as a fang. It lacerates his social pretentiousness, his snobbery,
the scorbutic blotches on his face, and his little white eyes. Poor
young Mr. Taylor once showed him a handsome silver-hilted sword. He
admired it, till he saw on the scabbard the damning inscription, “Royal
Exchange.” “Take your sword,” said he; “it’s surprising a man of your
sense should commit an error; for fifty guineas I would not have a city
name on any article of my dress.” She comments: “Now would anyone
suppose this fine gentleman’s father was in trade and he himself brought
up in that very city he affects to despise? Very true, nevertheless.”

How, by the way, did she know that? Who told her? And, by the way, how
did she know about Mrs. Tulloch? But one must not ask such dreadful
questions. They shatter the foundations of faith.

    And so his studied attention to me in the minutest article
    effectually shielded him from suspicion till his end was
    answered, of raising up a party against us, by the means of that
    vile woman, who was anxious to triumph over me, especially as I
    have been repeatedly compelled (for the honour of the sex) to
    censure her swearing and indecent behaviour. I have, therefore,
    little comfort to look forward to for the remainder of the
    voyage.

Then she reckons up her allies, or rather the neutrals. They are a
feeble set.

    It is only justice to name Mr. Taylor as an amiable though
    melancholy companion, and Mr. Manesty, an agreeable young man
    under twenty. Mr. Fuller is a middle-aged man. He has, it seems,
    fallen into the hands of sharpers and been completely pillaged.
    He has the finest dark eyes I ever met with. Mr. Moreau, a
    musician, is very civil and attentive.

Small fry like these could be no help. They can scarcely have got enough
to eat at dinner. Her truer supports lay within.

    Having early discovered the confederacy, prudence determined us
    to go mildly on, seemingly blind to what it was beyond our power
    to remedy. Never intermeddling with their disputes, all
    endeavours to draw us into quarrels are vainly exerted. I
    despise them too much to be angry.

And the letter concludes with a moving picture of home life in the Red
Sea:

    After meals I generally retire to my cabin, where I find plenty
    of employment, having made up a dozen shirts for Mr. Fay out of
    some cloth I purchased to replace part of those stolen by the
    Arabs. Sometimes I read French or Italian and study Portuguese.
    I likewise prevailed on Mr. Fay to teach me shorthand, in
    consequence of the airs Mr. Hare gave himself because he was
    master of this art and had taught his sisters to correspond with
    him in it. The matter was very easily accomplished. In short, I
    have discovered abundant methods of making my time pass usefully
    and not disagreeably. How often, since in this situation, have I
    blessed God that He has been pleased to endow me with a mind
    capable of furnishing its own amusement, despite of all means
    used to discompose it.

Admirable too is the tone of the postscript:

    I am in tolerable health and looking with a longing eye towards
    Bengal, from whence I trust my next will be dated. The climate
    seems likely to agree very well with me. I do not at all mind
    the heat, nor does it at all affect either my spirits or my
    appetite.—Your ever affectionate E. F.

She was to date her next not from Bengal but from prison. Here, however,
her Alexandrian audience must really have the decency to retire. Eliza
in chains is too terrible a theme. Let it suffice to say that though in
chains she remained Eliza, and that Mrs. Tulloch was enchained too; and
let those who would know more procure “The Original Letters from India
of Mrs. Eliza Fay,” published by the Calcutta Historical Society. The
book contains a portrait of our heroine, which quite fills the cup of
joy. She stands before us in the Oriental robes she detested so much,
but she has thrown back their superfluities and gazes at the world as
though seeing through its little tricks. One trousered foot is advanced,
one bangled arm is bent into an attitude of dignified defiance. Her
expression, though triumphant, is alert. She is attended in the
background by a maid-servant and a mosque.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        COTTON FROM THE OUTSIDE


                                   I

“Oh, Heaven help us! What is that dreadful noise! Run, run! Has somebody
been killed?”

“Do not distress yourself, kind-hearted sir. It is only the merchants of
Alexandria, buying cotton.”

“But they are murdering one another surely.”

“Not so. They merely gesticulate.”

“Does any place exist whence one could view their gestures in safety?”

“There is such a place.”

“I shall come to no bodily harm there?”

“None, none.”

“Then conduct me, pray.”

And mounting to an upper chamber we looked down into a stupendous Hall.

It is usual to compare such visions to Dante’s Inferno, but this really
did resemble it, because it was marked out into the concentric circles
of which the Florentine speaks. Divided from each other by ornamental
balustrades, they increased in torment as they decreased in size, so
that the inmost ring was congested beyond redemption with perspiring
souls. They shouted and waved and spat at each other across the central
basin which was empty but for a permanent official who sat there, fixed
in ice. Now and then he rang a little bell, and now and then another
official, who dwelt upon a ladder far away, climbed and wrote upon a
board with chalk. The merchants hit their heads and howled. A terrible
calm ensued. Something worse was coming. While it gathered we spoke.

“Oh, name this place!”

“It is none other than the Bourse. Cotton is sold at this end, Stocks
and Shares at that.”

And I perceived a duplicate fabric at the farther end of the Hall, a
subsidiary or rather a superseded Hell, for its circles were deserted,
it was lashed by no everlasting wind, and such souls as loitered against
its balustrades seemed pensive in their mien. This was the Stock
Exchange—such a great name in England, but negligible here where only
cotton counts. Cotton shirts and cotton wool and reels of cotton would
not come to us if merchants did not suffer in Alexandria. Nay,
Alexandria herself could not have re-arisen from the waves, there would
be no French gardens, no English church at Bulkeley, possibly not even
any drains....

Help! Oh, help! help! Oh, horrible, too horrible! For the storm had
broken. With the scream of a devil in pain a stout Greek fell sideways
over the balustrade, then righted himself, then fell again, and as he
fell and rose he chanted “Teekoty Peapot, Teekoty Peapot.” He was
offering to sell cotton. Towards him, bull-shouldered, moved a lout in a
tarboosh. Everyone else screamed too, using odd little rhythms to
advertise their individuality. Some shouted unnoticed, others would
evoke a kindred soul, and right across the central pool business would
be transacted. They seemed to have evolved a new sense. They
communicated by means unknown to normal men. A wave of the note-book,
and the thing was done. And the imitation marble pillars shook, and the
ceiling that was painted to look like sculpture trembled, and Time
himself stood still in the person of a sham-renaissance clock. And a
British officer who was watching the scene said—never mind what he said.

Hence, hence!


                                   II

My next vision is cloistral in comparison. Vision of a quiet courtyard a
mile away (Minet el Bassal), where the cotton was sold on sample. Pieces
of fluff sailed through the sunlight and stuck to my clothes. Their
source was the backs of Arabs, who were running noiselessly about,
carrying packages, and as they passed it seemed to be the proper thing
to stretch out one’s hand and to pull out a tuft of cotton, to twiddle
it, and to set it sailing. I like to think that the merchant to whom it
next stuck bought it, but this is an unbridled fancy. Let us keep to
facts, such as to the small fountain in the middle of the courtyard,
which supported a few aquatic plants, or to the genuine Oriental carpets
which were exposed for sale on the opposite wall. They lent an air of
culture, which was very pleasing. Yet, though here there was no cause
for fear, the place was even more mysterious than the Bourse. What did
it all mean? To the outsider nothing seems more capricious than the
mechanism of business. It runs smoothly when he expects it to creak, and
creaks when he expects it to be still. Considering how these same men
could howl and spit, one would have anticipated more animation over the
samples. Perhaps they sometimes showed it, but my memory is of calm
celibates in dust-coats who stood idling in the sunshine before the
doors of their cells, sipping coffee and exchanging anecdotes of a
somewhat mechanical impropriety. Very good the coffee was, too, and the
very blue sky and the keen air and the bright dresses of some natives
raised for a moment the illusion that this courtyard was actually the
academic East, and that caravans of camels were waiting with their snowy
bales outside. There were other courtyards with ramifications of
passages and offices, where the same mixture of light business and light
refreshments seemed in progress—architectural backwaters such as one
used to come across in the Earl’s Court Exhibition, where commerce and
pleasure met in a slack communion. These I did not care for, but the
main courtyard was really rather jolly, and that British officer (had he
visited it) could certainly have left his comment (whatever it was)
unspoken.

Hence!


                                  III

In the final stage I was in the thick of it again, though in a very
different sort of thickness. Cotton was everywhere. The flakes of Minet
el Bassal had become a snowstorm, which hurtled through the air and lay
upon the ground in drifts. The cotton was being pressed into bales, and
perhaps being cleaned too—it is shocking not to be sure, but the row was
tremendous. The noise was made no longer by merchants—who seldom so far
remount the sources of their wealth—but by a certain amount of wooden
machinery and by a great many Arabs. Some of them were fighting with
masses of the stuff which was poured over them from an endless
staircase. Just as they mastered it, more would arrive and completely
bury them. They would shout with laughter and struggle, and then more
cotton would come and more, quivering from the impetus of its transit,
so that one could not tell which was vegetable, which man. They thrust
it into a pit in the flooring, upon which other Arabs danced. This was
the first stage in the pressing—exerted by the human foot with the
assistance of song. The chant rose and fell. It was better than the
chants of the Bourse, being generic not personal, and of immemorial
age—older than Hell at all events. When the Arabs had trodden the cotton
tight, up they jumped, and one of them struck the flooring with his
hand. The bottom of the pit opened in response, a sack was drawn across
by invisible agents, and the mass sank out of sight into a lower room,
where the final pressure was exerted on it by machinery. We went down to
see this and to hear the “cri du coton,” which it gives when it can
shrink no more. Metal binders were clamped round it and secured by hand,
and then the completed bale—as hard as iron and containing two or three
Arabs inside it for all I know—was tumbled away to the warehouse.

It is difficult to speak intelligently about or against machinery, and
my comments made no great stir—_e.g._ “Why has it to be pressed?” and
“Do the different people’s cotton not get mixed?” and “What I like is,
it is so primitive.” To this last indeed it was somewhat severely
replied that the process I had viewed was anything but primitive—nay,
that it was the last word on cotton-pressing, or it would not have been
adopted at Alexandria. This was conclusive, and one can only hope that
it will be the last word for ever, and that for century after century
brown legs and rhythmic songs will greet the advancing cataracts of
snow. That peevish British officer would have forgotten his peevishness
had he come here. He would have regretted his criticism of the Bourse.
It was “A bomb in the middle of them is the only possible comment,” and
when he made it I realized that there was someone in the world even more
outside cotton than I was myself.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                THE DEN


At last I have been to a Den. The attempt was first made many years ago
in Lahore City, where my guide was a young Missionary, who wasted all
his time in liking people and making them like him. I have often
wondered what he found to convert, and what his financial backers—old
ladies in America and England—will have to say upon the results of his
labours. He had lived in the Lahore bazaars as a poor man, and as he
walked through their intricacies he explained how this became
comprehensible, and that pardonable, and that inevitable, so soon as one
drew close enough to it to understand. We did interesting things—went
into a temple as big as a cupboard where we were allowed to hold the
gods and ring the bells, visited a lawyer who was defending a client
against the charge of selling a wife—and as the afternoon closed the
Missionary said he supposed I should like to include a Den. He remarked
that a great deal of rubbish was talked about opium, and he led me to a
courtyard, round whose sides were some lean-to’s of straw. “Oh! it isn’t
working,” he said with disappointment. He peered about and pulled from a
lean-to a solitary sinner. “Look at his eyes,” he said. “I’m afraid
that’s all.”

There my acquaintance with Vice stopped, until Egypt, the land of so
much, promised new opportunities. It would not be opium here, but
hashish, a more lurid drug. Concealed in walking-sticks, it gave
delicious dreams. So I was glad of a chance of accompanying the police
of Alexandria upon a raid. Their moral tone was superior to the
Missionary’s, but they had no better luck. Advancing stealthily upon a
fragile door they burst it open and we rushed in. We were in a passage,
open to the stars. Right and left of it, and communicating with one
another, were sheds which the police explored with their heavy shoulders
and large feet. In one of them they found a tired white horse. A
corporal climbed into the manger. “They often secrete bowls here,” he
said. At the end of the passage we came upon human life. A family was
asleep by the light of a lamp—not suspiciously asleep, but reasonably
disturbed by our irruption. The civil father was ordered to arise and
carry the lamp about, and by its light we found a hollow reed, at which
the police sniffed heavily. Traces of hashish adhered to it, they
pronounced. That was all. They were delighted with the find, for it
confirmed their official faith—that the city they controlled was almost
pure but not quite. Too much or too little would have discredited them.

A few weeks later an Egyptian friend offered to take me round the native
quarters of the same town. We did interesting things—saw a circumcision
procession, listened to an epic recitation—and as the evening closed he
asked me whether I should like to include a Den. He thought he knew of
one. Having laid his hand on his forehead for a moment he led through
intricate streets to a door. We opened it silently and slipped in. There
was something familiar in the passage, and my forebodings were confirmed
by the sight of a white horse. I had left as an avenging angel, I was to
return as a devotee. I knew better than my friend that we should find no
hashish—not even the hollow reed, for it had been confiscated as an
exhibit to the Police Station—but I said nothing, and in due time we
disturbed the sleeping family. They were uncivil and refused to move
their lamp. My friend was disappointed. For my own part I could hardly
help being sorry for poor sin. In all the vast city was this her one
retreat?

But outside he had an idea. He thought he knew of another Den, which was
less exposed to the onslaughts of purity since it was owned by a British
subject. We would go there. And we found the genuine article at last. It
was up a flight of stairs, down which the odour (not a disagreeable one)
floated. The proprietor—a one-eyed Maltese—battled with us at the top.
He hadn’t hashish, he cried, he didn’t know what hashish was, he hardly
knew what a room was or a house. But we got in and saw the company.
There is really nothing to say when one comes to the point. They were
just smoking. And at the present moment they don’t even smoke, for my
one and only Den has been suppressed by the police—just as his old
ladies must by now have suppressed my Missionary at Lahore.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                      BETWEEN THE SUN AND THE MOON


Of the three streets that dispute the honour of being Alexandria’s
premier thoroughfare the Rue Rosette undoubtedly bears the palm for
gentility. The Bond Street (I refer to Rue Chérif Pacha) is too shoppy
to be genteel, and the Boulevard de Ramleh competes from this particular
aspect not at all. In its length, its cleanliness, and the refined
monotony of its architecture, Rue Rosette outdoes either of its rivals.
They are tainted with utility: people use them to get something or
somewhere. But Rue Rosette is an end in itself. It starts in the middle
of the town and no man can tell where it stops: a goal it may have, but
not one discoverable by mortal leg. Its horizon, narrow but
uninterrupted, ever unrolls into a ribbon of blue sky above the
wayfarer’s head, and the ribbon of white beneath his feet corresponds,
and right and left of him are the houses that he thought he had passed a
quarter of an hour before. Oh, it is so dull! Its dullness is really
indescribable. What seem at first to be incidents—such as the trays of
worthies who project from the clubs—prove at a second glance to be
subdued to what they sit in. They are half asleep. For you cannot have
gentility without paying for it.

The poor street does not want to be dull. It wants to be smart, and of a
Parisian smartness. Eternally well-dressed people driving infinitely in
either direction—that is its ideal. It is not mine, and we meet as
seldom as possible in consequence. But friends of a higher social
outlook tell me that, by a great effort, they can feel perfectly at home
in the Rue Rosette—can transform the municipal buildings into
Ministries, and the Consulates into Embassies, and arabias into
broughams, can increase the polish on the gentlemen’s boots and the
frou-frou from the ladies’ skirts, until the Rue Rosette becomes what it
yearns to be—a masterpiece by Baron Haussmann, debouching in an Arc de
Triomphe instead of a Police Station.

I have never been able to make that effort. When fancies do come here,
they are of an older and friendlier civilization. I recall Achilles
Tatius, a bishop of the post-classical period, who wrote a somewhat
improper novel. He made his hero enter Alexandria by this very street
one thousand years ago. It was not called the Rue Rosette then, but the
Canopic Road, and it was not genteel or smart but presented throughout
its length scenes of extraordinary splendour. Beginning at the Gate of
the Sun (by the Public Gardens) it traversed the city uninterruptedly
until it reached the waters of the Harbour (near Minet el Bassal), and
here stood the Gate of the Moon, to close what the Sun had begun. The
street was lined with marble colonnades from end to end, as was the Rue
Nebi Daniel, and the point of their intersection (where one now stands
in hopeless expectation of a tram) was one of the most glorious
crossways of the ancient world. Clitophon (it was thus that the Bishop
named his hero) paused there in his walk, and looked down the four
vistas, over whose ranks rose temples and palaces and tombs, and he
tells us that the crossways bore the name of Alexander, and that the
Mausoleum close to them was Alexander’s tomb. He does not tell us more,
being in search of a female companion named Leucippe, whom he deems of
more permanent interest, but there is no reason to doubt his statements,
for Achilles Tatius himself lived here and dare not cause his characters
to lie. The passage gleams like a jewel among the amorous rubbish that
surrounds it. The vanished glory leaps up again, not in architectural
detail but as a city of the soul. There (beneath the Mosque of Nebi
Daniel) is the body of Alexander the Great. There he lies, lapped in
gold and laid in a coffin of glass. When Clitophon made his visit he had
already lain there for eight hundred years, and according to legend he
lies there still, walled into a forgotten cellar. And of this glory all
that tangibly remains is a road: the alignment of the Rue Rosette.
Christian and Arab destroyed the rest, but they could not destroy the
direction of a road. Towards the harbour they did divert it, certainly;
the great thoroughfare contracts into the Rue Sidi Metwalli and becomes
heaven knows what in the neighbourhood of the Rue des Sœurs. But in its
eastern stretch it runs with its old decision, and the limestone and
stucco still throw over it the shadows that marble once threw.

Of the two gates there survives not even a description. They may have
been masterpieces of art, they may have been simple entrances, but they
must certainly have included shrines to the god and goddess who
respectively guarded them. No one took much notice of the shrines.
Paganism, even in the days of Clitophon and Leucippe, was dead. It is
dead, yet the twin luminaries still reign over the street and give it
what it has of beauty. In the evening the western vista can blaze with
orange and scarlet, and the eastern, having darkened, can shimmer with a
mysterious radiance, out of which, incredibly large, rises the globe of
the moon.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE SOLITARY PLACE


Delicate yet august, the country that stretches westward from the
expiring waters of Lake Mariout is not easy to describe. Though it
contains accredited Oriental ingredients, such as camels, a mirage, and
Bedouins, and though it remounts to a high antiquity, yet I cannot
imagine our powerful professional novelists getting to work at it, and
extracting from its quiet recesses hot tales about mummies and sin. Its
basis is a soft limestone, which rises on the seaward side into two
well-defined and parallel ridges, and swells inland into gentle hills
whose outlines and colouring often suggest a Scotch moor: the whole
district has a marked tendency to go purple, especially in its
hollows—into that sombre brownish purple that may be caused by moorland
growths. Many of the bushes are like flowerless heather. In the lower
ground barley is cultivated, and depends for its success upon an
occasional violent thunderstorm which shall swill a sudden torrent off
the hills. The ancients cultivated vines and olives here too, as the
remains of their presses prove, and Cleopatra had a garden here, but
from such luxuries the soil has desisted. It has beat a general retreat
from civilization, and the spirit of the place, without being savage, is
singularly austere. Its chief episode is the great temple of Abousir,
which with its attendant beacon-tower stands so magnificently upon the
coastal ridge. And inland lie the marble basilicas of St. Menas and his
holy well. But these apart, there is nothing to catch the attention. The
tents of the Bedouins, so Mongolian in outline, seldom cut the lines of
the sky, but blend in colour with the stone, against which they crouch.
The quarries, vast and romantic, lie hidden in the flanks of the
limestone. They do not play the part that a chalk-pit does in the
landscape of the Sussex downs. The place is not a wilderness, it is a
working concern. But it is essentially solitary, and only once a year
does it, for a brief space, put its solitude away, and blossom.

There is nothing there of the ordered progress of the English spring,
with its slow extension from wood-anemones through primroses into the
buttercups of June. The flowers come all of a rush. One week there is
nothing but spikes and buds, then the temperature rises or the wind
drops, and whole tracts turn lilac or scarlet. They scarcely wait for
their leaves, they are in such a hurry, and many of them blossom like
little footstools, close to the ground. They do not keep their times.
They scarcely keep their places, and you may look in vain for them this
season where you found them last. There is a certain tract of yellow
marigolds that I suspect of migration. One year it was in a quarry, the
next by the railway line, now it has flown a distance of five and a half
miles and unfolded its carpet on the slopes beneath Abousir. All is
confusion and hurry. The white tassels of garlic that wave in the shadow
of the temple may be fallen to-morrow, the blue buds of the borage never
have time to unfold. The pageant passes like the waving of a
handkerchief, but in compensation without the lumber that attends the
passing of an English spring, no stalks and reluctant exits of half-dead
leaves. As it came, so it goes. It has been more like a ray of coloured
light playing on the earth than the work of the earth herself, and if
one had not picked a few of the flowers and entombed them in vases upon
an Alexandrian mantelpiece, they could seem afterwards like the growths
of a dream.

It would require a botanist to do justice to these flowers, but
fortunately there is no occasion to do justice to flowers. They are not
Government officials. Let their titles and duties remain for the most
part unknown. The most permanent of them are, oddly enough, the
asphodels, whose coarse stems and turbid venous blossoms have
disappointed many who dreamt of the Elysian Fields. How came the Greeks
to plant so buxom a bulb in the solitary place they imagined beyond the
grave—that place which though full of philosophers and charioteers
remains for ever empty? The asphodel is built to resist rough winds and
to stand on the slopes of an earthly hill. It is too heavy for the hands
of ghosts, too harsh for their feet, but perhaps ours were not the
asphodels the Greeks planted, and their ghosts may have walked upon what
we call Stars of Bethlehem. The marigolds are solid too, but for the
most part the flora are very delicate, and their colours aerial. There
is a tiny vetch that hesitates between terracotta and claret. There is a
scented yellow flower the size of flax which is only found in one part
of the district and which closes in the evening when the irises unfold.
Two of these irises are dwarf, and coloured purple and deep blue; at
third is larger and china blue. There are tracts of night-scented stock.
Down in the quarries grows a rock plant with a dull red spire and a
fleshy leaf that almost adheres to the stone. As for the shrubs, some
have transparent joints that look filled with wine; while from the
woolly fibre of others jut buttons like a blue scabious. Other blue
plants wave their heads in the barley. Mignonette, purple and white
anemones, scarlet and yellow ranunculus, scarlet poppies, coltsfoot and
dwarf orange marigolds, nettles genuine and false, henbane, mallows,
celandine, hen and chickens, lords and ladies, convolvulus. English
daisies I do not remember. And many of these flowers are not the
varieties we know in England. The lords and ladies, for instance, are
smaller and thrust up their pale green spoons in the open ground. While,
to compensate, there is a larger kind—an arum of great size with a
coal-black sheath and clapper—a positively Satanic plant, such as Des
Esseintes would have commanded for his conservatory. In this way, just
here and there, the tropic note is struck, and reminds us that these
familiar and semi-familiar flowers are after all growing in Africa, and
that those swelling hills stretch southwards towards the heart of the
dark continent.

But what impresses one most in the scene is the quiet persistence of the
earth. There is so little soil about and she does so much with it. Year
after year she has given this extraordinary show to a few Bedouins, has
covered the Mareotic civilization with dust and raised flowers from its
shards. Will she do the same to our own tins and barbed wire? Probably
not, for man has now got so far ahead of other forms of life that he
will scarcely permit the flowers to grow over his works again. His old
tins will be buried under new tins. This is the triumph of civilization,
I suppose, the final imprint of the human upon this devoted planet,
which should exhibit in its apotheosis a solid crust of machinery and
graves. In cities one sees this development coming, but in solitary
places, however austere, the primæval softness persists, the vegetation
still flowers and seeds unchecked, and the air still blows untainted hot
from the land or cold from the sea. I have tried to describe this
Mariout country as it is at the beginning of March, when the earth makes
her great effort. In a few days the wind may scratch and tear the
blossoms, in a few weeks the sun will scorch the leaves. The spongeous
red growth of the ice-plant endures longest and further empurples the
hills. This too will dry up and the bones of the limestone reappear.
Then all will be quiet till the first winter rain, when the camels will
be driven out to surface-plough. A rectangle is outlined on the soil and
scattered with seed barley. Then the camel will shuffle up and down
dragging after him a wooden plough that looks like a half-open penknife,
and the Bedouin, guiding it, will sing tunes to the camel that he can
only sing to the camel, because in his mind the tune and the camel are
the same thing.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       THE POETRY OF C. P. CAVAFY


Modern Alexandria is scarcely a city of the soul. Founded upon cotton
with the concurrence of onions and eggs, ill built, ill planned, ill
drained—many hard things can be said against it, and most are said by
its inhabitants. Yet to some of them, as they traverse the streets, a
delightful experience can occur. They hear their own name proclaimed in
firm yet meditative accents—accents that seem not so much to expect an
answer as to pay homage to the fact of individuality. They turn and see
a Greek gentleman in a straw hat, standing absolutely motionless at a
slight angle to the universe. His arms are extended, possibly. “Oh,
Cavafy...!” Yes, it is Mr. Cavafy, and he is going either from his flat
to the office, or from his office to the flat. If the former, he
vanishes when seen, with a slight gesture of despair. If the latter, he
may be prevailed upon to begin a sentence—an immense complicated yet
shapely sentence, full of parentheses that never get mixed and of
reservations that really do reserve; a sentence that moves with logic to
its foreseen end, yet to an end that is always more vivid and thrilling
than one foresaw. Sometimes the sentence is finished in the street,
sometimes the traffic murders it, sometimes it lasts into the flat. It
deals with the tricky behaviour of the Emperor Alexius Comnenus in 1096,
or with olives, their possibilities and price, or with the fortunes of
friends, or George Eliot, or the dialects of the interior of Asia Minor.
It is delivered with equal ease in Greek, English, or French. And
despite its intellectual richness and human outlook, despite the matured
charity of its judgments, one feels that it too stands at a slight angle
to the universe: it is the sentence of a poet.

A Greek who wishes to compose poetry has a special problem; between his
written and spoken language yawns a gulf. There is an artificial
“literary” jargon beloved by schoolmasters and journalists, which has
tried to revive the classical tradition, and which only succeeds in
being dull. And there is the speech of the people, varying from place to
place, and everywhere stuffed with non-Hellenic constructions and words.
Can this speech be used for poetry and for cultivated prose? The younger
generation believes that it can. A society (Nea Zoe) was started in
Alexandria to encourage it, and shocks the stodgy not only by its
writings but by its vocabulary—expressions are used that one might
actually hear in a shop. Similar movements are born and die all over the
Levant, from Smyrna and Cyprus to Jannina, all testifying to the zeal of
a race who, alone among the peoples of the Eastern Mediterranean, appear
to possess the literary sense and to desire that words should be alive.
Cavafy is one of the heroes of this movement, though not one of its
extremists. Eclectic by nature, he sees that a new theory might be as
sterile as the old, and that the final test must be the incommunicable
one of taste. His own poems are in Demotic, but in moderate Demotic.

They are all short poems, and unrhymed, so that there is some hope of
conveying them in a verbal translation. They reveal a beautiful and
curious world. It comes into being through the world of experience, but
it is not experience, for the poet is even more incapable than most
people of seeing straight:

 Here let me stand. Let me too look at Nature a little,
 the radiant blue of the morning sea,
 the cloudless sky and the yellow beach;
 all beautiful and flooded with light.
 Here let me stand. And let me deceive myself into thinking that I saw
    them—
 (I really did see them one moment, when first I came)
 —that I am not seeing, even here, my fancies,
 my memories, my visions of voluptuousness.

It is the world within. And since the poet cannot hope to escape from
this world, he should at all costs arrange and rule it sensibly. “My
mind to me a kingdom is,” sang the Elizabethan, and so is Cavafy’s; but
his is a real, not a conventional, kingdom, in which there may be
mutinies and war. In “The City” he sketches the tragedy of one who
misgoverned, and who hopes to leave the chaos behind him and to “build
another city, better than this.” Useless!

     The city shall ever follow you.
     In these same streets you shall wander,
     and in the same purlieux you shall roam,
     and in the same house you shall grow grey....
     There is no ship to take you to other lands, there is no road.
     You have so shattered your life here, in this small corner,
     that in all the world you have ruined it.

And in “Ithaca” he sketches another and a nobler tragedy—that of a man
who seeks loftily, and finds at the end that the goal has not been worth
the effort. Such a man should not lament. He has not failed really.

      Ithaca gave you your fair voyage.
      Without her you would not have ventured on the way,
      but she has no more to give you.

      And if you find Ithaca a poor place, she has not mocked you.

      You have become so wise, so full of experience,
      that you should understand by now what these Ithacas mean.

The above extracts illustrate one of Cavafy’s moods—intensely
subjective; scenery, cities and legends all re-emerge in terms of the
mind. There is another mood in which he stands apart from his
subject-matter, and with the detachment of an artist hammers it into
shape. The historian comes to the front now, and it is interesting to
note how different is his history from an Englishman’s. He even looks
back upon a different Greece. Athens and Sparta, so drubbed into us at
school, are to him two quarrelsome little slave states, ephemeral beside
the Hellenistic kingdoms that followed them, just as these are ephemeral
beside the secular empire of Constantinople. He reacts against the
tyranny of Classicism—Pericles and Aspasia and Themistocles and all
those bores. Alexandria, his birthplace, came into being just when
Public School Greece decayed; kings, emperors, patriarchs have trodden
the ground between his office and his flat; his literary ancestor—if he
has one—is Callimachus, and his poems bear such titles as “The
Displeasure of the Seleucid,” “In the Month of Athyr,” “Manuel
Comnenus,” and are prefaced by quotations from Philostratus or Lucian.

Two of these poems shall be quoted in full, to illustrate his method.[2]
In the first he adopts the precise, almost mincing style of a chronicle
to build up his effect. It is called “Alexandrian Kings” and deals with
an episode of the reign of Cleopatra and Antony.

Footnote 2:

  A third is on page 56.

         An Alexandrian crowd collected
         to see the sons of Cleopatra,
         Cæsarion and his little brothers
         Alexander and Ptolemy, who for the first
         time were brought to the Gymnasium,
         there to be crowned as kings
         amidst a splendid display of troops.

         Alexander they named king
         of Armenia, of Media, and of the Parthians.
         Ptolemy they named king
         of Cilicia, of Syria, and Phœnicia.
         Cæsarion stood a little in front,
         clad in silk the colour of roses,
         with a bunch of hyacinths at his breast.
         His belt was a double line of sapphires and amethysts,
         his sandals were bound with white ribbons
         embroidered with rosy pearls.
         Him they acclaimed more than the small ones.
         Him they named “King of Kings!”

         The Alexandrians knew perfectly well
         that all this was words and empty pomp.

         But the day was warm and exquisite,
         the sky clear and blue,
         the Gymnasium of Alexandria a triumph of art,
         the courtiers’ apparel magnificent,
         Cæsarion full of grace and beauty
         (son of Cleopatra, blood of the Lagidæ!),
         and the Alexandrians ran to see the show
         and grew enthusiastic, and applauded
         in Greek, in Egyptian, and some in Hebrew,
         bewitched with the beautiful spectacle,
         though they knew perfectly well how worthless,
         what empty words, were these king-makings.

Such a poem has, even in a translation, a “distinguished” air. It is the
work of an artist who is not interested in facile beauty. In the second
example, though its subject-matter is pathetic, Cavafy stands equally
aloof. The poem is broken into half-lines; he is spelling out an epitaph
on a young man who died in the month of Athyr, the ancient Egyptian
November, and he would convey the obscurity, the poignancy, that
sometimes arise together out of the past, entwined into a single ghost:

    It is hard to read ... on the ancient stone.
    “Lord Jesus Christ” ... I make out the word “Soul.”
    “In the month of Athyr ... Lucius fell asleep.”
    His age is mentioned ... “He lived years....”—
    The letters KZ show ... that he fell asleep young.
    In the damaged part I see the words ... “Him ... Alexandrian.”
    Then come three lines ... much mutilated.
    But I can read a few words ... perhaps “our tears” and “sorrows.”
    And again: “Tears” ... and: “for us his friends mourning.”
    I think Lucius ... was much beloved.
    In the month of Athyr ... Lucius fell asleep....

Such a writer can never be popular. He flies both too slowly and too
high. Whether subjective or objective, he is equally remote from the
bustle of the moment, he will never compose either a Royalist or a
Venizelist Hymn. He has the strength (and of course the limitations) of
the recluse, who, though not afraid of the world, always stands at a
slight angle to it, and, in conversation, he has sometimes devoted a
sentence to this subject. Which is better—the world or seclusion?
Cavafy, who has tried both, can’t say. But so much is certain—either
life entails courage, or it ceases to be life.

“The cow is there,” said Ansell, lighting a match and holding it out
over the carpet. No one spoke. He waited till the end of the match fell
off. Then he said again, “She is there, the cow. There, now.”

“You have not proved it,” said a voice.

“I have proved it to myself.”

“I have proved to myself that she isn’t,” said the voice. “The cow is
not there.” Ansell frowned and lit another match.

“She’s there for me,” he declared. “I don’t care whether she’s there for
you or not. Whether I’m in Cambridge or Iceland or dead, the cow will be
there.”

It was philosophy. They were discussing the existence of objects. Do
they exist only when there is some one to look at them? Or have they a
real existence of their own? It is all very interesting, but at the same
time it is difficult. Hence the cow. She seemed to make things
easier. She was so familiar, so solid, that surely the truths that she
illustrated would in time become familiar and solid also. Is the cow
there or not? This was better than deciding between objectivity and
subjectivity. So at Oxford, just at the same time, one was asking, “What
do our rooms look like in the vac.?”

“Look here, Ansell. I’m there--in the meadow--the cow’s there. You’re
there--the cow’s there. Do you agree so far?” “Well?”

“Well, if you go, the cow stops; but if I go, the cow goes. Then what
will happen if you stop and I go?”

Several voices cried out that this was quibbling.

“I know it is,” said the speaker brightly, and silence descended again,
while they tried honestly to think the matter out.

Rickie, on whose carpet the matches were being dropped, did not like to
join in the discussion. It was too difficult for him. He could not even
quibble. If he spoke, he should simply make himself a fool. He preferred
to listen, and to watch the tobacco-smoke stealing out past the
window-seat into the tranquil October air. He could see the court too,
and the college cat teasing the college tortoise, and the kitchen-men
with supper-trays upon their heads. Hot food for one--that must be for
the geographical don, who never came in for Hall; cold food for three,
apparently at half-a-crown a head, for some one he did not know; hot
food, a la carte--obviously for the ladies haunting the next staircase;
cold food for two, at two shillings--going to Ansell’s rooms for himself
and Ansell, and as it passed under the lamp he saw that it was meringues
again. Then the bedmakers began to arrive, chatting to each other
pleasantly, and he could hear Ansell’s bedmaker say, “Oh dang!” when
she found she had to lay Ansell’s tablecloth; for there was not a breath
stirring. The great elms were motionless, and seemed still in the glory
of midsummer, for the darkness hid the yellow blotches on their leaves,
and their outlines were still rounded against the tender sky. Those elms
were Dryads--so Rickie believed or pretended, and the line between the
two is subtler than we admit. At all events they were lady trees, and
had for generations fooled the college statutes by their residence in
the haunts of youth.

But what about the cow? He returned to her with a start, for this would
never do. He also would try to think the matter out. Was she there or
not? The cow. There or not. He strained his eyes into the night.

Either way it was attractive. If she was there, other cows were there
too. The darkness of Europe was dotted with them, and in the far East
their flanks were shining in the rising sun. Great herds of them stood
browsing in pastures where no man came nor need ever come, or plashed
knee-deep by the brink of impassable rivers. And this, moreover, was the
view of Ansell. Yet Tilliard’s view had a good deal in it. One might do
worse than follow Tilliard, and suppose the cow not to be there unless
oneself was there to see her. A cowless world, then, stretched round
him on every side. Yet he had only to peep into a field, and, click! it
would at once become radiant with bovine life.

Suddenly he realized that this, again, would never do. As usual, he had
missed the whole point, and was overlaying philosophy with gross and
senseless details. For if the cow was not there, the world and the
fields were not there either. And what would Ansell care about sunlit
flanks or impassable streams? Rickie rebuked his own groveling soul, and
turned his eyes away from the night, which had led him to such absurd
conclusions.

The fire was dancing, and the shadow of Ansell, who stood close up to
it, seemed to dominate the little room. He was still talking, or rather
jerking, and he was still lighting matches and dropping their ends upon
the carpet. Now and then he would make a motion with his feet as if he
were running quickly backward upstairs, and would tread on the edge
of the fender, so that the fire-irons went flying and the buttered-bun
dishes crashed against each other in the hearth. The other philosophers
were crouched in odd shapes on the sofa and table and chairs, and one,
who was a little bored, had crawled to the piano and was timidly trying
the Prelude to Rhinegold with his knee upon the soft pedal. The air was
heavy with good tobacco-smoke and the pleasant warmth of tea, and as
Rickie became more sleepy the events of the day seemed to float one by
one before his acquiescent eyes. In the morning he had read Theocritus,
whom he believed to be the greatest of Greek poets; he had lunched with
a merry don and had tasted Zwieback biscuits; then he had walked with
people he liked, and had walked just long enough; and now his room was
full of other people whom he liked, and when they left he would go and
have supper with Ansell, whom he liked as well as any one. A year ago
he had known none of these joys. He had crept cold and friendless
and ignorant out of a great public school, preparing for a silent and
solitary journey, and praying as a highest favour that he might be left
alone. Cambridge had not answered his prayer. She had taken and soothed
him, and warmed him, and had laughed at him a little, saying that he
must not be so tragic yet awhile, for his boyhood had been but a dusty
corridor that led to the spacious halls of youth. In one year he had
made many friends and learnt much, and he might learn even more if he
could but concentrate his attention on that cow.

The fire had died down, and in the gloom the man by the piano ventured
to ask what would happen if an objective cow had a subjective calf.
Ansell gave an angry sigh, and at that moment there was a tap on the
door.

“Come in!” said Rickie.

The door opened. A tall young woman stood framed in the light that fell
from the passage.

“Ladies!” whispered every-one in great agitation.

“Yes?” he said nervously, limping towards the door (he was rather lame).
“Yes? Please come in. Can I be any good--”

“Wicked boy!” exclaimed the young lady, advancing a gloved finger into
the room. “Wicked, wicked boy!”

He clasped his head with his hands.

“Agnes! Oh how perfectly awful!”

“Wicked, intolerable boy!” She turned on the electric light. The
philosophers were revealed with unpleasing suddenness. “My goodness,
a tea-party! Oh really, Rickie, you are too bad! I say again: wicked,
abominable, intolerable boy! I’ll have you horsewhipped. If you
please”--she turned to the symposium, which had now risen to its feet
“If you please, he asks me and my brother for the week-end. We
accept. At the station, no Rickie. We drive to where his old lodgings
were--Trumpery Road or some such name--and he’s left them. I’m furious,
and before I can stop my brother, he’s paid off the cab and there we are
stranded. I’ve walked--walked for miles. Pray can you tell me what is to
be done with Rickie?”

“He must indeed be horsewhipped,” said Tilliard pleasantly. Then he made
a bolt for the door.

“Tilliard--do stop--let me introduce Miss Pembroke--don’t all go!” For
his friends were flying from his visitor like mists before the sun.
“Oh, Agnes, I am so sorry; I’ve nothing to say. I simply forgot you were
coming, and everything about you.”

“Thank you, thank you! And how soon will you remember to ask where
Herbert is?”

“Where is he, then?”

“I shall not tell you.”

“But didn’t he walk with you?”

“I shall not tell, Rickie. It’s part of your punishment. You are not
really sorry yet. I shall punish you again later.”

She was quite right. Rickie was not as much upset as he ought to have
been. He was sorry that he had forgotten, and that he had caused his
visitors inconvenience. But he did not feel profoundly degraded, as a
young man should who has acted discourteously to a young lady. Had he
acted discourteously to his bedmaker or his gyp, he would have minded
just as much, which was not polite of him.

“First, I’ll go and get food. Do sit down and rest. Oh, let me
introduce--”

Ansell was now the sole remnant of the discussion party. He still stood
on the hearthrug with a burnt match in his hand. Miss Pembroke’s arrival
had never disturbed him.

“Let me introduce Mr. Ansell--Miss Pembroke.”

There came an awful moment--a moment when he almost regretted that
he had a clever friend. Ansell remained absolutely motionless, moving
neither hand nor head. Such behaviour is so unknown that Miss Pembroke
did not realize what had happened, and kept her own hand stretched out
longer than is maidenly.

“Coming to supper?” asked Ansell in low, grave tones.

“I don’t think so,” said Rickie helplessly.

Ansell departed without another word.

“Don’t mind us,” said Miss Pembroke pleasantly. “Why shouldn’t you keep
your engagement with your friend? Herbert’s finding lodgings,--that’s
why he’s not here,--and they’re sure to be able to give us some dinner.
What jolly rooms you’ve got!”

“Oh no--not a bit. I say, I am sorry. I am sorry. I am most awfully
sorry.”

“What about?”

“Ansell” Then he burst forth. “Ansell isn’t a gentleman. His father’s a
draper. His uncles are farmers. He’s here because he’s so clever--just
on account of his brains. Now, sit down. He isn’t a gentleman at all.”
 And he hurried off to order some dinner.

“What a snob the boy is getting!” thought Agnes, a good deal mollified.
It never struck her that those could be the words of affection--that
Rickie would never have spoken them about a person whom he disliked.
Nor did it strike her that Ansell’s humble birth scarcely explained
the quality of his rudeness. She was willing to find life full of
trivialities. Six months ago and she might have minded; but now--she
cared not what men might do unto her, for she had her own splendid
lover, who could have knocked all these unhealthy undergraduates into
a cocked-hat. She dared not tell Gerald a word of what had happened: he
might have come up from wherever he was and half killed Ansell. And she
determined not to tell her brother either, for her nature was kindly,
and it pleased her to pass things over.

She took off her gloves, and then she took off her ear-rings and began
to admire them. These ear-rings were a freak of hers--her only freak.
She had always wanted some, and the day Gerald asked her to marry him
she went to a shop and had her ears pierced. In some wonderful way she
knew that it was right. And he had given her the rings--little gold
knobs, copied, the jeweller told them, from something prehistoric and
he had kissed the spots of blood on her handkerchief. Herbert, as usual,
had been shocked.

“I can’t help it,” she cried, springing up. “I’m not like other girls.”
 She began to pace about Rickie’s room, for she hated to keep quiet.
There was nothing much to see in it. The pictures were not attractive,
nor did they attract her--school groups, Watts’ “Sir Percival,” a
dog running after a rabbit, a man running after a maid, a cheap brown
Madonna in a cheap green frame--in short, a collection where one
mediocrity was generally cancelled by another. Over the door there hung
a long photograph of a city with waterways, which Agnes, who had never
been to Venice, took to be Venice, but which people who had been to
Stockholm knew to be Stockholm. Rickie’s mother, looking rather sweet,
was standing on the mantelpiece. Some more pictures had just arrived
from the framers and were leaning with their faces to the wall, but she
did not bother to turn them round. On the table were dirty teacups, a
flat chocolate cake, and Omar Khayyam, with an Oswego biscuit between
his pages. Also a vase filled with the crimson leaves of autumn. This
made her smile.

Then she saw her host’s shoes: he had left them lying on the sofa.
Rickie was slightly deformed, and so the shoes were not the same size,
and one of them had a thick heel to help him towards an even walk.
“Ugh!” she exclaimed, and removed them gingerly to the bedroom. There
she saw other shoes and boots and pumps, a whole row of them, all
deformed. “Ugh! Poor boy! It is too bad. Why shouldn’t he be like other
people? This hereditary business is too awful.” She shut the door with
a sigh. Then she recalled the perfect form of Gerald, his athletic walk,
the poise of his shoulders, his arms stretched forward to receive her.
Gradually she was comforted.

“I beg your pardon, miss, but might I ask how many to lay?” It was the
bedmaker, Mrs. Aberdeen.

“Three, I think,” said Agnes, smiling pleasantly. “Mr. Elliot’ll be back
in a minute. He has gone to order dinner.

“Thank you, miss.”

“Plenty of teacups to wash up!”

“But teacups is easy washing, particularly Mr. Elliot’s.”

“Why are his so easy?”

“Because no nasty corners in them to hold the dirt. Mr. Anderson--he’s
below-has crinkly noctagons, and one wouldn’t believe the difference.
It was I bought these for Mr. Elliot. His one thought is to save one
trouble. I never seed such a thoughtful gentleman. The world, I say,
will be the better for him.” She took the teacups into the gyp room, and
then returned with the tablecloth, and added, “if he’s spared.”

“I’m afraid he isn’t strong,” said Agnes.

“Oh, miss, his nose! I don’t know what he’d say if he knew I mentioned
his nose, but really I must speak to someone, and he has neither father
nor mother. His nose! It poured twice with blood in the Long.”

“Yes?”

“It’s a thing that ought to be known. I assure you, that little room!...
And in any case, Mr. Elliot’s a gentleman that can ill afford to lose
it. Luckily his friends were up; and I always say they’re more like
brothers than anything else.”

“Nice for him. He has no real brothers.”

“Oh, Mr. Hornblower, he is a merry gentleman, and Mr. Tilliard too!
And Mr. Elliot himself likes his romp at times. Why, it’s the merriest
staircase in the buildings! Last night the bedmaker from W said to
me, ‘What are you doing to my gentlemen? Here’s Mr. Ansell come back ‘ot
with his collar flopping.’ I said, ‘And a good thing.’ Some bedders keep
their gentlemen just so; but surely, miss, the world being what it is,
the longer one is able to laugh in it the better.”

Bedmakers have to be comic and dishonest. It is expected of them. In a
picture of university life it is their only function. So when we meet
one who has the face of a lady, and feelings of which a lady might be
proud, we pass her by.

“Yes?” said Miss Pembroke, and then their talk was stopped by the
arrival of her brother.

“It is too bad!” he exclaimed. “It is really too bad.”

“Now, Bertie boy, Bertie boy! I’ll have no peevishness.”

“I am not peevish, Agnes, but I have a full right to be. Pray, why did
he not meet us? Why did he not provide rooms? And pray, why did you
leave me to do all the settling? All the lodgings I knew are full, and
our bedrooms look into a mews. I cannot help it. And then--look here!
It really is too bad.” He held up his foot like a wounded dog. It was
dripping with water.

“Oho! This explains the peevishness. Off with it at once. It’ll be
another of your colds.”

“I really think I had better.” He sat down by the fire and daintily
unlaced his boot. “I notice a great change in university tone. I can
never remember swaggering three abreast along the pavement and charging
inoffensive visitors into a gutter when I was an undergraduate. One of
the men, too, wore an Eton tie. But the others, I should say, came from
very queer schools, if they came from any schools at all.”

Mr. Pembroke was nearly twenty years older than his sister, and had
never been as handsome. But he was not at all the person to knock into
a gutter, for though not in orders, he had the air of being on the verge
of them, and his features, as well as his clothes, had the clerical
cut. In his presence conversation became pure and colourless and full
of understatements, and--just as if he was a real clergyman--neither
men nor boys ever forgot that he was there. He had observed this, and it
pleased him very much. His conscience permitted him to enter the Church
whenever his profession, which was the scholastic, should demand it.

“No gutter in the world’s as wet as this,” said Agnes, who had peeled
off her brother’s sock, and was now toasting it at the embers on a pair
of tongs.

“Surely you know the running water by the edge of the Trumpington road?
It’s turned on occasionally to clear away the refuse--a most primitive
idea. When I was up we had a joke about it, and called it the ‘Pem.’”

“How complimentary!”

“You foolish girl,--not after me, of course. We called it the ‘Pem’
because it is close to Pembroke College. I remember--” He smiled a
little, and twiddled his toes. Then he remembered the bedmaker, and
said, “My sock is now dry. My sock, please.”

“Your sock is sopping. No, you don’t!” She twitched the tongs away from
him. Mrs. Aberdeen, without speaking, fetched a pair of Rickie’s socks
and a pair of Rickie’s shoes.

“Thank you; ah, thank you. I am sure Mr. Elliot would allow it.”

Then he said in French to his sister, “Has there been the slightest sign
of Frederick?”

“Now, do call him Rickie, and talk English. I found him here. He had
forgotten about us, and was very sorry. Now he’s gone to get some
dinner, and I can’t think why he isn’t back.”

Mrs. Aberdeen left them.

“He wants pulling up sharply. There is nothing original in
absent-mindedness. True originality lies elsewhere. Really, the lower
classes have no nous. However can I wear such deformities?” For he had
been madly trying to cram a right-hand foot into a left-hand shoe.

“Don’t!” said Agnes hastily. “Don’t touch the poor fellow’s things.” The
sight of the smart, stubby patent leather made her almost feel faint.
She had known Rickie for many years, but it seemed so dreadful and so
different now that he was a man. It was her first great contact with the
abnormal, and unknown fibres of her being rose in revolt against it. She
frowned when she heard his uneven tread upon the stairs.

“Agnes--before he arrives--you ought never to have left me and gone
to his rooms alone. A most elementary transgression. Imagine the
unpleasantness if you had found him with friends. If Gerald--”

Rickie by now had got into a fluster. At the kitchens he had lost his
head, and when his turn came--he had had to wait--he had yielded his
place to those behind, saying that he didn’t matter. And he had wasted
more precious time buying bananas, though he knew that the Pembrokes
were not partial to fruit. Amid much tardy and chaotic hospitality
the meal got under way. All the spoons and forks were anyhow, for Mrs.
Aberdeen’s virtues were not practical. The fish seemed never to have
been alive, the meat had no kick, and the cork of the college
claret slid forth silently, as if ashamed of the contents. Agnes was
particularly pleasant. But her brother could not recover himself. He
still remembered their desolate arrival, and he could feel the waters of
the Pem eating into his instep.

“Rickie,” cried the lady, “are you aware that you haven’t congratulated
me on my engagement?”

Rickie laughed nervously, and said, “Why no! No more I have.”

“Say something pretty, then.”

“I hope you’ll be very happy,” he mumbled. “But I don’t know anything
about marriage.”

“Oh, you awful boy! Herbert, isn’t he just the same? But you do know
something about Gerald, so don’t be so chilly and cautious. I’ve just
realized, looking at those groups, that you must have been at school
together. Did you come much across him?”

“Very little,” he answered, and sounded shy. He got up hastily, and
began to muddle with the coffee.

“But he was in the same house. Surely that’s a house group?”

“He was a prefect.” He made his coffee on the simple system. One had a
brown pot, into which the boiling stuff was poured. Just before serving
one put in a drop of cold water, and the idea was that the grounds fell
to the bottom.

“Wasn’t he a kind of athletic marvel? Couldn’t he knock any boy or
master down?”

“Yes.”

“If he had wanted to,” said Mr. Pembroke, who had not spoken for some
time.

“If he had wanted to,” echoed Rickie. “I do hope, Agnes, you’ll be most
awfully happy. I don’t know anything about the army, but I should think
it must be most awfully interesting.”

Mr. Pembroke laughed faintly.

“Yes, Rickie. The army is a most interesting profession,--the profession
of Wellington and Marlborough and Lord Roberts; a most interesting
profession, as you observe. A profession that may mean death--death,
rather than dishonour.”

“That’s nice,” said Rickie, speaking to himself. “Any profession
may mean dishonour, but one isn’t allowed to die instead. The army’s
different. If a soldier makes a mess, it’s thought rather decent of
him, isn’t it, if he blows out his brains? In the other professions it
somehow seems cowardly.”

“I am not competent to pronounce,” said Mr. Pembroke, who was not
accustomed to have his schoolroom satire commented on. “I merely know
that the army is the finest profession in the world. Which reminds me,
Rickie--have you been thinking about yours?”

“No.”

“Not at all?”

“No.”

“Now, Herbert, don’t bother him. Have another meringue.”

“But, Rickie, my dear boy, you’re twenty. It’s time you thought. The
Tripos is the beginning of life, not the end. In less than two years you
will have got your B.A. What are you going to do with it?”

“I don’t know.”

“You’re M.A., aren’t you?” asked Agnes; but her brother proceeded--

“I have seen so many promising, brilliant lives wrecked simply on
account of this--not settling soon enough. My dear boy, you must think.
Consult your tastes if possible--but think. You have not a moment to
lose. The Bar, like your father?”

“Oh, I wouldn’t like that at all.”

“I don’t mention the Church.”

“Oh, Rickie, do be a clergyman!” said Miss Pembroke. “You’d be simply
killing in a wide-awake.”

He looked at his guests hopelessly. Their kindness and competence
overwhelmed him. “I wish I could talk to them as I talk to myself,” he
thought. “I’m not such an ass when I talk to myself. I don’t believe,
for instance, that quite all I thought about the cow was rot.” Aloud he
said, “I’ve sometimes wondered about writing.”

“Writing?” said Mr. Pembroke, with the tone of one who gives everything
its trial. “Well, what about writing? What kind of writing?”

“I rather like,”--he suppressed something in his throat,--“I rather like
trying to write little stories.”

“Why, I made sure it was poetry!” said Agnes. “You’re just the boy for
poetry.”

“I had no idea you wrote. Would you let me see something? Then I could
judge.”

The author shook his head. “I don’t show it to any one. It isn’t
anything. I just try because it amuses me.”

“What is it about?”

“Silly nonsense.”

“Are you ever going to show it to any one?”

“I don’t think so.”

Mr. Pembroke did not reply, firstly, because the meringue he was eating
was, after all, Rickie’s; secondly, because it was gluey and stuck his
jaws together. Agnes observed that the writing was really a very good
idea: there was Rickie’s aunt,--she could push him.

“Aunt Emily never pushes any one; she says they always rebound and crush
her.”

“I only had the pleasure of seeing your aunt once. I should have thought
her a quite uncrushable person. But she would be sure to help you.”

“I couldn’t show her anything. She’d think them even sillier than they
are.”

“Always running yourself down! There speaks the artist!”

“I’m not modest,” he said anxiously. “I just know they’re bad.”

Mr. Pembroke’s teeth were clear of meringue, and he could refrain no
longer. “My dear Rickie, your father and mother are dead, and you often
say your aunt takes no interest in you. Therefore your life depends on
yourself. Think it over carefully, but settle, and having once settled,
stick. If you think that this writing is practicable, and that you
could make your living by it--that you could, if needs be, support a
wife--then by all means write. But you must work. Work and drudge. Begin
at the bottom of the ladder and work upwards.”

Rickie’s head drooped. Any metaphor silenced him. He never thought of
replying that art is not a ladder--with a curate, as it were, on the
first rung, a rector on the second, and a bishop, still nearer heaven,
at the top. He never retorted that the artist is not a bricklayer at
all, but a horseman, whose business it is to catch Pegasus at once,
not to practise for him by mounting tamer colts. This is hard, hot, and
generally ungraceful work, but it is not drudgery. For drudgery is not
art, and cannot lead to it.

“Of course I don’t really think about writing,” he said, as he poured
the cold water into the coffee. “Even if my things ever were decent, I
don’t think the magazines would take them, and the magazines are one’s
only chance. I read somewhere, too, that Marie Corelli’s about the only
person who makes a thing out of literature. I’m certain it wouldn’t pay
me.”

“I never mentioned the word ‘pay,’” said Mr. Pembroke uneasily.

“You must not consider money. There are ideals too.”

“I have no ideals.”

“Rickie!” she exclaimed. “Horrible boy!”

“No, Agnes, I have no ideals.” Then he got very red, for it was a phrase
he had caught from Ansell, and he could not remember what came next.

“The person who has no ideals,” she exclaimed, “is to be pitied.”

“I think so too,” said Mr. Pembroke, sipping his coffee. “Life without
an ideal would be like the sky without the sun.”

Rickie looked towards the night, wherein there now twinkled innumerable
stars--gods and heroes, virgins and brides, to whom the Greeks have
given their names.

“Life without an ideal--” repeated Mr. Pembroke, and then stopped, for
his mouth was full of coffee grounds. The same affliction had overtaken
Agnes. After a little jocose laughter they departed to their lodgings,
and Rickie, having seen them as far as the porter’s lodge, hurried,
singing as he went, to Ansell’s room, burst open the door, and said,
“Look here! Whatever do you mean by it?”

“By what?” Ansell was sitting alone with a piece of paper in front of
him. On it was a diagram--a circle inside a square, inside which was
again a square.

“By being so rude. You’re no gentleman, and I told her so.” He slammed
him on the head with a sofa cushion. “I’m certain one ought to be
polite, even to people who aren’t saved.” (“Not saved” was a phrase they
applied just then to those whom they did not like or intimately
know.) “And I believe she is saved. I never knew any one so always
good-tempered and kind. She’s been kind to me ever since I knew her. I
wish you’d heard her trying to stop her brother: you’d have certainly
come round. Not but what he was only being nice as well. But she is
really nice. And I thought she came into the room so beautifully. Do you
know--oh, of course, you despise music--but Anderson was playing Wagner,
and he’d just got to the part where they sing

    ‘Rheingold!
    ‘Rheingold!

and the sun strikes into the waters, and the music, which up to then has
so often been in E flat--”

“Goes into D sharp. I have not understood a single word, partly because
you talk as if your mouth was full of plums, partly because I don’t know
whom you’re talking about.” “Miss Pembroke--whom you saw.”

“I saw no one.”

“Who came in?”

“No one came in.”

“You’re an ass!” shrieked Rickie. “She came in. You saw her come in. She
and her brother have been to dinner.”

“You only think so. They were not really there.”

“But they stop till Monday.”

“You only think that they are stopping.”

“But--oh, look here, shut up! The girl like an empress--”

“I saw no empress, nor any girl, nor have you seen them.”

“Ansell, don’t rag.”

“Elliot, I never rag, and you know it. She was not really there.”

There was a moment’s silence. Then Rickie exclaimed, “I’ve got you. You
say--or was it Tilliard?--no, YOU say that the cow’s there. Well--there
these people are, then. Got you. Yah!”

“Did it never strike you that phenomena may be of two kinds: ONE, those
which have a real existence, such as the cow; TWO, those which are
the subjective product of a diseased imagination, and which, to our
destruction, we invest with the semblance of reality? If this never
struck you, let it strike you now.”

Rickie spoke again, but received no answer. He paced a little up and
down the sombre roam. Then he sat on the edge of the table and watched
his clever friend draw within the square a circle, and within the
circle a square, and inside that another circle, and inside that another
square.

“Why will you do that?”

No answer.

“Are they real?”

“The inside one is--the one in the middle of everything, that there’s
never room enough to draw.”



II

A little this side of Madingley, to the left of the road, there is a
secluded dell, paved with grass and planted with fir-trees. It could not
have been worth a visit twenty years ago, for then it was only a scar
of chalk, and it is not worth a visit at the present day, for the trees
have grown too thick and choked it. But when Rickie was up, it chanced
to be the brief season of its romance, a season as brief for a chalk-pit
as a man--its divine interval between the bareness of boyhood and the
stuffiness of age. Rickie had discovered it in his second term, when the
January snows had melted and left fiords and lagoons of clearest water
between the inequalities of the floor. The place looked as big as
Switzerland or Norway--as indeed for the moment it was--and he came upon
it at a time when his life too was beginning to expand. Accordingly the
dell became for him a kind of church--a church where indeed you could
do anything you liked, but where anything you did would be transfigured.
Like the ancient Greeks, he could even laugh at his holy place and
leave it no less holy. He chatted gaily about it, and about the pleasant
thoughts with which it inspired him; he took his friends there; he even
took people whom he did not like. “Procul este, profani!” exclaimed a
delighted aesthete on being introduced to it. But this was never to be
the attitude of Rickie. He did not love the vulgar herd, but he knew
that his own vulgarity would be greater if he forbade it ingress, and
that it was not by preciosity that he would attain to the intimate
spirit of the dell. Indeed, if he had agreed with the aesthete, he
would possibly not have introduced him. If the dell was to bear any
inscription, he would have liked it to be “This way to Heaven,” painted
on a sign-post by the high-road, and he did not realize till later years
that the number of visitors would not thereby have sensibly increased.

On the blessed Monday that the Pembrokes left, he walked out here with
three friends. It was a day when the sky seemed enormous. One cloud,
as large as a continent, was voyaging near the sun, whilst other clouds
seemed anchored to the horizon, too lazy or too happy to move. The sky
itself was of the palest blue, paling to white where it approached the
earth; and the earth, brown, wet, and odorous, was engaged beneath it on
its yearly duty of decay. Rickie was open to the complexities of autumn;
he felt extremely tiny--extremely tiny and extremely important; and
perhaps the combination is as fair as any that exists. He hoped that all
his life he would never be peevish or unkind.

“Elliot is in a dangerous state,” said Ansell. They had reached the
dell, and had stood for some time in silence, each leaning against a
tree. It was too wet to sit down.

“How’s that?” asked Rickie, who had not known he was in any state at
all. He shut up Keats, whom he thought he had been reading, and slipped
him back into his coat-pocket. Scarcely ever was he without a book.

“He’s trying to like people.”

“Then he’s done for,” said Widdrington. “He’s dead.”

“He’s trying to like Hornblower.”

The others gave shrill agonized cries.

“He wants to bind the college together. He wants to link us to the beefy
set.”

“I do like Hornblower,” he protested. “I don’t try.”

“And Hornblower tries to like you.”

“That part doesn’t matter.”

“But he does try to like you. He tries not to despise you. It is
altogether a most public-spirited affair.”

“Tilliard started them,” said Widdrington. “Tilliard thinks it such a
pity the college should be split into sets.”

“Oh, Tilliard!” said Ansell, with much irritation. “But what can you
expect from a person who’s eternally beautiful? The other night we had
been discussing a long time, and suddenly the light was turned on. Every
one else looked a sight, as they ought. But there was Tilliard, sitting
neatly on a little chair, like an undersized god, with not a curl
crooked. I should say he will get into the Foreign Office.”

“Why are most of us so ugly?” laughed Rickie.

“It’s merely a sign of our salvation--merely another sign that the
college is split.”

“The college isn’t split,” cried Rickie, who got excited on this subject
with unfailing regularity. “The college is, and has been, and always
will be, one. What you call the beefy set aren’t a set at all. They’re
just the rowing people, and naturally they chiefly see each other; but
they’re always nice to me or to any one. Of course, they think us rather
asses, but it’s quite in a pleasant way.”

“That’s my whole objection,” said Ansell. “What right have they to
think us asses in a pleasant way? Why don’t they hate us? What right has
Hornblower to smack me on the back when I’ve been rude to him?”

“Well, what right have you to be rude to him?”

“Because I hate him. You think it is so splendid to hate no one. I tell
you it is a crime. You want to love every one equally, and that’s worse
than impossible it’s wrong. When you denounce sets, you’re really trying
to destroy friendship.”

“I maintain,” said Rickie--it was a verb he clung to, in the hope that
it would lend stability to what followed--“I maintain that one can like
many more people than one supposes.”

“And I maintain that you hate many more people than you pretend.”

“I hate no one,” he exclaimed with extraordinary vehemence, and the dell
re-echoed that it hated no one.

“We are obliged to believe you,” said Widdrington, smiling a little “but
we are sorry about it.”

“Not even your father?” asked Ansell.

Rickie was silent.

“Not even your father?”

The cloud above extended a great promontory across the sun. It only lay
there for a moment, yet that was enough to summon the lurking coldness
from the earth.

“Does he hate his father?” said Widdrington, who had not known. “Oh,
good!”

“But his father’s dead. He will say it doesn’t count.”

“Still, it’s something. Do you hate yours?”

Ansell did not reply. Rickie said: “I say, I wonder whether one ought to
talk like this?”

“About hating dead people?”

“Yes--”

“Did you hate your mother?” asked Widdrington.

Rickie turned crimson.

“I don’t see Hornblower’s such a rotter,” remarked the other man, whose
name was James.

“James, you are diplomatic,” said Ansell. “You are trying to tide over
an awkward moment. You can go.”

Widdrington was crimson too. In his wish to be sprightly he had used
words without thinking of their meanings. Suddenly he realized that
“father” and “mother” really meant father and mother--people whom he had
himself at home. He was very uncomfortable, and thought Rickie had been
rather queer. He too tried to revert to Hornblower, but Ansell would not
let him. The sun came out, and struck on the white ramparts of the dell.
Rickie looked straight at it. Then he said abruptly--

“I think I want to talk.”

“I think you do,” replied Ansell.

“Shouldn’t I be rather a fool if I went through Cambridge without
talking? It’s said never to come so easy again. All the people are dead
too. I can’t see why I shouldn’t tell you most things about my birth and
parentage and education.”

“Talk away. If you bore us, we have books.”

With this invitation Rickie began to relate his history. The reader who
has no book will be obliged to listen to it.

Some people spend their lives in a suburb, and not for any urgent
reason. This had been the fate of Rickie. He had opened his eyes
to filmy heavens, and taken his first walk on asphalt. He had seen
civilization as a row of semi-detached villas, and society as a state in
which men do not know the men who live next door. He had himself become
part of the grey monotony that surrounds all cities. There was no
necessity for this--it was only rather convenient to his father.

Mr. Elliot was a barrister. In appearance he resembled his son, being
weakly and lame, with hollow little cheeks, a broad white band of
forehead, and stiff impoverished hair. His voice, which he did not
transmit, was very suave, with a fine command of cynical intonation.
By altering it ever so little he could make people wince, especially if
they were simple or poor. Nor did he transmit his eyes. Their peculiar
flatness, as if the soul looked through dirty window-panes, the
unkindness of them, the cowardice, the fear in them, were to trouble the
world no longer.

He married a girl whose voice was beautiful. There was no caress in
it yet all who heard it were soothed, as though the world held some
unexpected blessing. She called to her dogs one night over invisible
waters, and he, a tourist up on the bridge, thought “that is
extraordinarily adequate.” In time he discovered that her figure, face,
and thoughts were adequate also, and as she was not impossible socially,
he married her. “I have taken a plunge,” he told his family. The family,
hostile at first, had not a word to say when the woman was introduced
to them; and his sister declared that the plunge had been taken from the
opposite bank.

Things only went right for a little time. Though beautiful without and
within, Mrs. Elliot had not the gift of making her home beautiful; and
one day, when she bought a carpet for the dining-room that clashed, he
laughed gently, said he “really couldn’t,” and departed. Departure is
perhaps too strong a word. In Mrs. Elliot’s mouth it became, “My husband
has to sleep more in town.” He often came down to see them, nearly
always unexpectedly, and occasionally they went to see him. “Father’s
house,” as Rickie called it, only had three rooms, but these were full
of books and pictures and flowers; and the flowers, instead of being
squashed down into the vases as they were in mummy’s house, rose
gracefully from frames of lead which lay coiled at the bottom, as
doubtless the sea serpent has to lie, coiled at the bottom of the sea.
Once he was let to lift a frame out--only once, for he dropped some
water on a creton. “I think he’s going to have taste,” said Mr. Elliot
languidly. “It is quite possible,” his wife replied. She had not taken
off her hat and gloves, nor even pulled up her veil. Mr. Elliot laughed,
and soon afterwards another lady came in, and they--went away.

“Why does father always laugh?” asked Rickie in the evening when he and
his mother were sitting in the nursery.

“It is a way of your father’s.”

“Why does he always laugh at me? Am I so funny?” Then after a pause,
“You have no sense of humour, have you, mummy?”

Mrs. Elliot, who was raising a thread of cotton to her lips, held it
suspended in amazement.

“You told him so this afternoon. But I have seen you laugh.” He nodded
wisely. “I have seen you laugh ever so often. One day you were laughing
alone all down in the sweet peas.”

“Was I?”

“Yes. Were you laughing at me?”

“I was not thinking about you. Cotton, please--a reel of No. 50 white
from my chest of drawers. Left hand drawer. Now which is your left
hand?”

“The side my pocket is.”

“And if you had no pocket?”

“The side my bad foot is.”

“I meant you to say, ‘the side my heart is,’” said Mrs. Elliot, holding
up the duster between them. “Most of us--I mean all of us--can feel on
one side a little watch, that never stops ticking. So even if you had no
bad foot you would still know which is the left. No. 50 white, please.
No; I’ll get it myself.” For she had remembered that the dark passage
frightened him.

These were the outlines. Rickie filled them in with the slowness and the
accuracy of a child. He was never told anything, but he discovered for
himself that his father and mother did not love each other, and that his
mother was lovable. He discovered that Mr. Elliot had dubbed him Rickie
because he was rickety, that he took pleasure in alluding to his son’s
deformity, and was sorry that it was not more serious than his own. Mr.
Elliot had not one scrap of genius. He gathered the pictures and the
books and the flower-supports mechanically, not in any impulse of love.
He passed for a cultured man because he knew how to select, and he
passed for an unconventional man because he did not select quite like
other people. In reality he never did or said or thought one single
thing that had the slightest beauty or value. And in time Rickie
discovered this as well.

The boy grew up in great loneliness. He worshipped his mother, and she
was fond of him. But she was dignified and reticent, and pathos, like
tattle, was disgusting to her. She was afraid of intimacy, in case it
led to confidences and tears, and so all her life she held her son at a
little distance. Her kindness and unselfishness knew no limits, but if
he tried to be dramatic and thank her, she told him not to be a little
goose. And so the only person he came to know at all was himself.
He would play Halma against himself. He would conduct solitary
conversations, in which one part of him asked and another part answered.
It was an exciting game, and concluded with the formula: “Good-bye.
Thank you. I am glad to have met you. I hope before long we shall enjoy
another chat.” And then perhaps he would sob for loneliness, for he
would see real people--real brothers, real friends--doing in warm life
the things he had pretended. “Shall I ever have a friend?” he demanded
at the age of twelve. “I don’t see how. They walk too fast. And a
brother I shall never have.”

(“No loss,” interrupted Widdrington.

“But I shall never have one, and so I quite want one, even now.”)

When he was thirteen Mr. Elliot entered on his illness. The pretty rooms
in town would not do for an invalid, and so he came back to his home.
One of the first consequences was that Rickie was sent to a public
school. Mrs. Elliot did what she could, but she had no hold whatever
over her husband.

“He worries me,” he declared. “He’s a joke of which I have got tired.”

“Would it be possible to send him to a private tutor’s?”

“No,” said Mr. Elliot, who had all the money. “Coddling.”

“I agree that boys ought to rough it; but when a boy is lame and very
delicate, he roughs it sufficiently if he leaves home. Rickie can’t play
games. He doesn’t make friends. He isn’t brilliant. Thinking it over, I
feel that as it’s like this, we can’t ever hope to give him the ordinary
education. Perhaps you could think it over too.” No.

“I am sure that things are best for him as they are. The day-school
knocks quite as many corners off him as he can stand. He hates it, but
it is good for him. A public school will not be good for him. It is too
rough. Instead of getting manly and hard, he will--”

“My head, please.”

Rickie departed in a state of bewildered misery, which was scarcely ever
to grow clearer.

Each holiday he found his father more irritable, and a little weaker.
Mrs. Elliot was quickly growing old. She had to manage the servants, to
hush the neighbouring children, to answer the correspondence, to paper
and re-paper the rooms--and all for the sake of a man whom she did not
like, and who did not conceal his dislike for her. One day she found
Rickie tearful, and said rather crossly, “Well, what is it this time?”

He replied, “Oh, mummy, I’ve seen your wrinkles your grey hair--I’m
unhappy.”

Sudden tenderness overcame her, and she cried, “My darling, what does it
matter? Whatever does it matter now?”

He had never known her so emotional. Yet even better did he remember
another incident. Hearing high voices from his father’s room, he went
upstairs in the hope that the sound of his tread might stop them. Mrs.
Elliot burst open the door, and seeing him, exclaimed, “My dear! If you
please, he’s hit me.” She tried to laugh it off, but a few hours later
he saw the bruise which the stick of the invalid had raised upon his
mother’s hand.

God alone knows how far we are in the grip of our bodies. He alone can
judge how far the cruelty of Mr. Elliot was the outcome of extenuating
circumstances. But Mrs. Elliot could accurately judge of its extent.

At last he died. Rickie was now fifteen, and got off a whole week’s
school for the funeral. His mother was rather strange. She was much
happier, she looked younger, and her mourning was as unobtrusive as
convention permitted. All this he had expected. But she seemed to
be watching him, and to be extremely anxious for his opinion on any,
subject--more especially on his father. Why? At last he saw that she was
trying to establish confidence between them. But confidence cannot be
established in a moment. They were both shy. The habit of years was
upon them, and they alluded to the death of Mr. Elliot as an irreparable
loss.

“Now that your father has gone, things will be very different.”

“Shall we be poorer, mother?” No.

“Oh!”

“But naturally things will be very different.”

“Yes, naturally.”

“For instance, your poor father liked being near London, but I almost
think we might move. Would you like that?”

“Of course, mummy.” He looked down at the ground. He was not accustomed
to being consulted, and it bewildered him.

“Perhaps you might like quite a different life better?”

He giggled.

“It’s a little difficult for me,” said Mrs. Elliot, pacing vigorously up
and down the room, and more and more did her black dress seem a mockery.
“In some ways you ought to be consulted: nearly all the money is left to
you, as you must hear some time or other. But in other ways you’re only
a boy. What am I to do?”

“I don’t know,” he replied, appearing more helpless and unhelpful than
he really was.

“For instance, would you like me to arrange things exactly as I like?”

“Oh do!” he exclaimed, thinking this a most brilliant suggestion.

“The very nicest thing of all.” And he added, in his half-pedantic,
half-pleasing way, “I shall be as wax in your hands, mamma.”

She smiled. “Very well, darling. You shall be.” And she pressed him
lovingly, as though she would mould him into something beautiful.

For the next few days great preparations were in the air. She went to
see his father’s sister, the gifted and vivacious Aunt Emily. They were
to live in the country--somewhere right in the country, with grass and
trees up to the door, and birds singing everywhere, and a tutor. For he
was not to go back to school. Unbelievable! He was never to go back to
school, and the head-master had written saying that he regretted the
step, but that possibly it was a wise one.

It was raw weather, and Mrs. Elliot watched over him with ceaseless
tenderness. It seemed as if she could not do too much to shield him and
to draw him nearer to her.

“Put on your greatcoat, dearest,” she said to him.

“I don’t think I want it,” answered Rickie, remembering that he was now
fifteen.

“The wind is bitter. You ought to put it on.”

“But it’s so heavy.”

“Do put it on, dear.”

He was not very often irritable or rude, but he answered, “Oh, I shan’t
catch cold. I do wish you wouldn’t keep on bothering.” He did not
catch cold, but while he was out his mother died. She only survived
her husband eleven days, a coincidence which was recorded on their
tombstone.

Such, in substance, was the story which Rickie told his friends as
they stood together in the shelter of the dell. The green bank at the
entrance hid the road and the world, and now, as in spring, they could
see nothing but snow-white ramparts and the evergreen foliage of the
firs. Only from time to time would a beech leaf flutter in from the
woods above, to comment on the waning year, and the warmth and radiance
of the sun would vanish behind a passing cloud.

About the greatcoat he did not tell them, for he could not have spoken
of it without tears.



III

Mr. Ansell, a provincial draper of moderate prosperity, ought by rights
to have been classed not with the cow, but with those phenomena that are
not really there. But his son, with pardonable illogicality, excepted
him. He never suspected that his father might be the subjective product
of a diseased imagination. From his earliest years he had taken him for
granted, as a most undeniable and lovable fact. To be born one thing and
grow up another--Ansell had accomplished this without weakening one
of the ties that bound him to his home. The rooms above the shop still
seemed as comfortable, the garden behind it as gracious, as they
had seemed fifteen years before, when he would sit behind Miss
Appleblossom’s central throne, and she, like some allegorical figure,
would send the change and receipted bills spinning away from her in
little boxwood balls. At first the young man had attributed these happy
relations to his own tact. But in time he perceived that the tact was
all on the side of his father. Mr. Ansell was not merely a man of some
education; he had what no education can bring--the power of detecting
what is important. Like many fathers, he had spared no expense over his
boy,--he had borrowed money to start him at a rapacious and fashionable
private school; he had sent him to tutors; he had sent him to Cambridge.
But he knew that all this was not the important thing. The important
thing was freedom. The boy must use his education as he chose, and if he
paid his father back it would certainly not be in his own coin. So when
Stewart said, “At Cambridge, can I read for the Moral Science Tripos?”
 Mr. Ansell had only replied, “This philosophy--do you say that it lies
behind everything?”

“Yes, I think so. It tries to discover what is good and true.”

“Then, my boy, you had better read as much of it as you can.”

And a year later: “I’d like to take up this philosophy seriously, but I
don’t feel justified.”

“Why not?”

“Because it brings in no return. I think I’m a great philosopher, but
then all philosophers think that, though they don’t dare to say so. But,
however great I am. I shan’t earn money. Perhaps I shan’t ever be able
to keep myself. I shan’t even get a good social position. You’ve only
to say one word, and I’ll work for the Civil Service. I’m good enough to
get in high.”

Mr. Ansell liked money and social position. But he knew that there is
a more important thing, and replied, “You must take up this philosophy
seriously, I think.”

“Another thing--there are the girls.”

“There is enough money now to get Mary and Maud as good husbands as they
deserve.” And Mary and Maud took the same view. It was in this plebeian
household that Rickie spent part of the Christmas vacation. His own
home, such as it was, was with the Silts, needy cousins of his father’s,
and combined to a peculiar degree the restrictions of hospitality with
the discomforts of a boarding-house. Such pleasure as he had outside
Cambridge was in the homes of his friends, and it was a particular joy
and honour to visit Ansell, who, though as free from social snobbishness
as most of us will ever manage to be, was rather careful when he drove
up to the facade of his shop.

“I like our new lettering,” he said thoughtfully. The words “Stewart
Ansell” were repeated again and again along the High Street--curly gold
letters that seemed to float in tanks of glazed chocolate.

“Rather!” said Rickie. But he wondered whether one of the bonds that
kept the Ansell family united might not be their complete absence of
taste--a surer bond by far than the identity of it. And he wondered this
again when he sat at tea opposite a long row of crayons--Stewart as a
baby, Stewart as a small boy with large feet, Stewart as a larger boy
with smaller feet, Mary reading a book whose leaves were as thick as
eiderdowns. And yet again did he wonder it when he woke with a gasp in
the night to find a harp in luminous paint throbbing and glowering at
him from the adjacent wall. “Watch and pray” was written on the harp,
and until Rickie hung a towel over it the exhortation was partially
successful.

It was a very happy visit. Miss Appleblosssom--who now acted as
housekeeper--had met him before, during her never-forgotten expedition
to Cambridge, and her admiration of University life was as shrill and
as genuine now as it had been then. The girls at first were a little
aggressive, for on his arrival he had been tired, and Maud had taken it
for haughtiness, and said he was looking down on them. But this passed.
They did not fall in love with him, nor he with them, but a morning was
spent very pleasantly in snow-balling in the back garden. Ansell was
rather different to what he was in Cambridge, but to Rickie not less
attractive. And there was a curious charm in the hum of the shop, which
swelled into a roar if one opened the partition door on a market-day.

“Listen to your money!” said Rickie. “I wish I could hear mine. I wish
my money was alive.”

“I don’t understand.”

“Mine’s dead money. It’s come to me through about six dead
people--silently.”

“Getting a little smaller and a little more respectable each time, on
account of the death-duties.”

“It needed to get respectable.”

“Why? Did your people, too, once keep a shop?”

“Oh, not as bad as that! They only swindled. About a hundred years ago
an Elliot did something shady and founded the fortunes of our house.”

“I never knew any one so relentless to his ancestors. You make up for
your soapiness towards the living.”

“You’d be relentless if you’d heard the Silts, as I have, talk about ‘a
fortune, small perhaps, but unsoiled by trade!’ Of course Aunt Emily is
rather different. Oh, goodness me! I’ve forgotten my aunt. She lives not
so far. I shall have to call on her.”

Accordingly he wrote to Mrs. Failing, and said he should like to pay his
respects. He told her about the Ansells, and so worded the letter that
she might reasonably have sent an invitation to his friend.

She replied that she was looking forward to their tete-a-tete.

“You mustn’t go round by the trains,” said Mr. Ansell. “It means
changing at Salisbury. By the road it’s no great way. Stewart shall
drive you over Salisbury Plain, and fetch you too.”

“There’s too much snow,” said Ansell.

“Then the girls shall take you in their sledge.”

“That I will,” said Maud, who was not unwilling to see the inside of
Cadover. But Rickie went round by the trains.

“We have all missed you,” said Ansell, when he returned. “There is a
general feeling that you are no nuisance, and had better stop till the
end of the vac.”

This he could not do. He was bound for Christmas to the Silts--“as a
REAL guest,” Mrs. Silt had written, underlining the word “real” twice.
And after Christmas he must go to the Pembrokes.

“These are no reasons. The only real reason for doing a thing is because
you want to do it. I think the talk about ‘engagements’ is cant.”

“I think perhaps it is,” said Rickie. But he went. Never had the turkey
been so athletic, or the plum-pudding tied into its cloth so tightly.
Yet he knew that both these symbols of hilarity had cost money, and
it went to his heart when Mr. Silt said in a hungry voice, “Have you
thought at all of what you want to be? No? Well, why should you? You
have no need to be anything.” And at dessert: “I wonder who Cadover goes
to? I expect money will follow money. It always does.” It was with a
guilty feeling of relief that he left for the Pembrokes’.

The Pembrokes lived in an adjacent suburb, or rather “sububurb,”--the
tract called Sawston, celebrated for its public school. Their style of
life, however, was not particularly suburban. Their house was small and
its name was Shelthorpe, but it had an air about it which suggested a
certain amount of money and a certain amount of taste. There were decent
water-colours in the drawing-room. Madonnas of acknowledged merit hung
upon the stairs. A replica of the Hermes of Praxiteles--of course only
the bust--stood in the hall with a real palm behind it. Agnes, in her
slap-dash way, was a good housekeeper, and kept the pretty things well
dusted. It was she who insisted on the strip of brown holland that led
diagonally from the front door to the door of Herbert’s study: boys’
grubby feet should not go treading on her Indian square. It was she who
always cleaned the picture-frames and washed the bust and the leaves of
the palm. In short, if a house could speak--and sometimes it does speak
more clearly than the people who live in it--the house of the Pembrokes
would have said, “I am not quite like other houses, yet I am perfectly
comfortable. I contain works of art and a microscope and books. But I do
not live for any of these things or suffer them to disarrange me. I live
for myself and for the greater houses that shall come after me. Yet in
me neither the cry of money nor the cry for money shall ever be heard.”

Mr. Pembroke was at the station. He did better as a host than as a
guest, and welcomed the young man with real friendliness.

“We were all coming, but Gerald has strained his ankle slightly,
and wants to keep quiet, as he is playing next week in a match. And,
needless to say, that explains the absence of my sister.”

“Gerald Dawes?”

“Yes; he’s with us. I’m so glad you’ll meet again.”

“So am I,” said Rickie with extreme awkwardness. “Does he remember me?”

“Vividly.”

Vivid also was Rickie’s remembrance of him.

“A splendid fellow,” asserted Mr. Pembroke.

“I hope that Agnes is well.”

“Thank you, yes; she is well. And I think you’re looking more like other
people yourself.”

“I’ve been having a very good time with a friend.”

“Indeed. That’s right. Who was that?”

Rickie had a young man’s reticence. He generally spoke of “a friend,”
 “a person I know,” “a place I was at.” When the book of life is opening,
our readings are secret, and we are unwilling to give chapter and verse.
Mr. Pembroke, who was half way through the volume, and had skipped or
forgotten the earlier pages, could not understand Rickie’s hesitation,
nor why with such awkwardness he should pronounce the harmless
dissyllable “Ansell.”

“Ansell? Wasn’t that the pleasant fellow who asked us to lunch?”

“No. That was Anderson, who keeps below. You didn’t see Ansell. The ones
who came to breakfast were Tilliard and Hornblower.”

“Of course. And since then you have been with the Silts. How are they?”

“Very well, thank you. They want to be remembered to you.”

The Pembrokes had formerly lived near the Elliots, and had shown great
kindness to Rickie when his parents died. They were thus rather in the
position of family friends.

“Please remember us when you write.” He added, almost roguishly, “The
Silts are kindness itself. All the same, it must be just a little--dull,
we thought, and we thought that you might like a change. And of course
we are delighted to have you besides. That goes without saying.”

“It’s very good of you,” said Rickie, who had accepted the invitation
because he felt he ought to.

“Not a bit. And you mustn’t expect us to be otherwise than quiet on the
holidays. There is a library of a sort, as you know, and you will find
Gerald a splendid fellow.”

“Will they be married soon?”

“Oh no!” whispered Mr. Pembroke, shutting his eyes, as if Rickie had
made some terrible faux pas. “It will be a very long engagement. He must
make his way first. I have seen such endless misery result from people
marrying before they have made their way.”

“Yes. That is so,” said Rickie despondently, thinking of the Silts.

“It’s a sad unpalatable truth,” said Mr. Pembroke, thinking that the
despondency might be personal, “but one must accept it. My sister and
Gerald, I am thankful to say, have accepted it, though naturally it has
been a little pill.”

Their cab lurched round the corner as he spoke, and the two patients
came in sight. Agnes was leaning over the creosoted garden-gate, and
behind her there stood a young man who had the figure of a Greek athlete
and the face of an English one. He was fair and cleanshaven, and his
colourless hair was cut rather short. The sun was in his eyes, and they,
like his mouth, seemed scarcely more than slits in his healthy skin.
Just where he began to be beautiful the clothes started. Round his neck
went an up-and-down collar and a mauve-and-gold tie, and the rest of his
limbs were hidden by a grey lounge suit, carefully creased in the right
places.

“Lovely! Lovely!” cried Agnes, banging on the gate, “Your train must
have been to the minute.”

“Hullo!” said the athlete, and vomited with the greeting a cloud of
tobacco-smoke. It must have been imprisoned in his mouth some time, for
no pipe was visible.

“Hullo!” returned Rickie, laughing violently. They shook hands.

“Where are you going, Rickie?” asked Agnes. “You aren’t grubby. Why
don’t you stop? Gerald, get the large wicker-chair. Herbert has letters,
but we can sit here till lunch. It’s like spring.”

The garden of Shelthorpe was nearly all in front an unusual and pleasant
arrangement. The front gate and the servants’ entrance were both at the
side, and in the remaining space the gardener had contrived a little
lawn where one could sit concealed from the road by a fence, from the
neighbour by a fence, from the house by a tree, and from the path by a
bush.

“This is the lovers’ bower,” observed Agnes, sitting down on the bench.
Rickie stood by her till the chair arrived.

“Are you smoking before lunch?” asked Mr. Dawes.

“No, thank you. I hardly ever smoke.”

“No vices. Aren’t you at Cambridge now?”

“Yes.”

“What’s your college?”

Rickie told him.

“Do you know Carruthers?”

“Rather!”

“I mean A. P. Carruthers, who got his socker blue.”

“Rather! He’s secretary to the college musical society.”

“A. P. Carruthers?”

“Yes.”

Mr. Dawes seemed offended. He tapped on his teeth, and remarked that the
weather bad no business to be so warm in winter. “But it was fiendish
before Christmas,” said Agnes.

He frowned, and asked, “Do you know a man called Gerrish?”

“No.”

“Ah.”

“Do you know James?”

“Never heard of him.”

“He’s my year too. He got a blue for hockey his second term.”

“I know nothing about the ‘Varsity.”

Rickie winced at the abbreviation “‘Varsity.” It was at that time the
proper thing to speak of “the University.”

“I haven’t the time,” pursued Mr. Dawes.

“No, no,” said Rickie politely.

“I had the chance of being an Undergrad, myself, and, by Jove, I’m
thankful I didn’t!”

“Why?” asked Agnes, for there was a pause.

“Puts you back in your profession. Men who go there first, before the
Army, start hopelessly behind. The same with the Stock Exchange or
Painting. I know men in both, and they’ve never caught up the time they
lost in the ‘Varsity--unless, of course, you turn parson.”

“I love Cambridge,” said she. “All those glorious buildings, and every
one so happy and running in and out of each other’s rooms all day long.”

“That might make an Undergrad happy, but I beg leave to state it
wouldn’t me. I haven’t four years to throw away for the sake of being
called a ‘Varsity man and hobnobbing with Lords.”

Rickie was prepared to find his old schoolfellow ungrammatical and
bumptious, but he was not prepared to find him peevish. Athletes, he
believed, were simple, straightforward people, cruel and brutal if you
like, but never petty. They knocked you down and hurt you, and then went
on their way rejoicing. For this, Rickie thought, there is something to
be said: he had escaped the sin of despising the physically strong--a
sin against which the physically weak must guard. But here was Dawes
returning again and again to the subject of the University, full of
transparent jealousy and petty spite, nagging, nagging, nagging, like
a maiden lady who has not been invited to a tea-party. Rickie wondered
whether, after all, Ansell and the extremists might not be right, and
bodily beauty and strength be signs of the soul’s damnation.

He glanced at Agnes. She was writing down some orderings for the
tradespeople on a piece of paper. Her handsome face was intent on the
work. The bench on which she and Gerald were sitting had no back, but
she sat as straight as a dart. He, though strong enough to sit straight,
did not take the trouble.

“Why don’t they talk to each other?” thought Rickie.

“Gerald, give this paper to the cook.”

“I can give it to the other slavey, can’t I?”

“She’d be dressing.”

“Well, there’s Herbert.”

“He’s busy. Oh, you know where the kitchen is. Take it to the cook.”

He disappeared slowly behind the tree.

“What do you think of him?” she immediately asked. He murmured civilly.

“Has he changed since he was a schoolboy?”

“In a way.”

“Do tell me all about him. Why won’t you?”

She might have seen a flash of horror pass over Rickie’s face. The
horror disappeared, for, thank God, he was now a man, whom civilization
protects. But he and Gerald had met, as it were, behind the scenes,
before our decorous drama opens, and there the elder boy had done things
to him--absurd things, not worth chronicling separately. An apple-pie
bed is nothing; pinches, kicks, boxed ears, twisted arms, pulled hair,
ghosts at night, inky books, befouled photographs, amount to very little
by themselves. But let them be united and continuous, and you have a
hell that no grown-up devil can devise. Between Rickie and Gerald there
lay a shadow that darkens life more often than we suppose. The bully and
his victim never quite forget their first relations. They meet in clubs
and country houses, and clap one another on the back; but in both the
memory is green of a more strenuous day, when they were boys together.

He tried to say, “He was the right kind of boy, and I was the wrong
kind.” But Cambridge would not let him smooth the situation over by
self-belittlement. If he had been the wrong kind of boy, Gerald had been
a worse kind. He murmured, “We are different, very,” and Miss Pembroke,
perhaps suspecting something, asked no more. But she kept to the subject
of Mr. Dawes, humorously depreciating her lover and discussing him
without reverence. Rickie laughed, but felt uncomfortable. When people
were engaged, he felt that they should be outside criticism. Yet here he
was criticizing. He could not help it. He was dragged in.

“I hope his ankle is better.”

“Never was bad. He’s always fussing over something.”

“He plays next week in a match, I think Herbert says.”

“I dare say he does.”

“Shall we be going?”

“Pray go if you like. I shall stop at home. I’ve had enough of cold
feet.”

It was all very colourless and odd.

Gerald returned, saying, “I can’t stand your cook. What’s she want to
ask me questions for? I can’t stand talking to servants. I say, ‘If I
speak to you, well and good’--and it’s another thing besides if she were
pretty.”

“Well, I hope our ugly cook will have lunch ready in a minute,” said
Agnes. “We’re frightfully unpunctual this morning, and I daren’t say
anything, because it was the same yesterday, and if I complain again
they might leave. Poor Rickie must be starved.”

“Why, the Silts gave me all these sandwiches and I’ve never eaten them.
They always stuff one.”

“And you thought you’d better, eh?” said Mr. Dawes, “in case you weren’t
stuffed here.”

Miss Pembroke, who house-kept somewhat economically, looked annoyed.

The voice of Mr. Pembroke was now heard calling from the house,
“Frederick! Frederick! My dear boy, pardon me. It was an important
letter about the Church Defence, otherwise--. Come in and see your
room.”

He was glad to quit the little lawn. He had learnt too much there. It
was dreadful: they did not love each other. More dreadful even than the
case of his father and mother, for they, until they married, had got on
pretty well. But this man was already rude and brutal and cold: he was
still the school bully who twisted up the arms of little boys, and ran
pins into them at chapel, and struck them in the stomach when they were
swinging on the horizontal bar. Poor Agnes; why ever had she done it?
Ought not somebody to interfere?

He had forgotten his sandwiches, and went back to get them.

Gerald and Agnes were locked in each other’s arms.

He only looked for a moment, but the sight burnt into his brain. The
man’s grip was the stronger. He had drawn the woman on to his knee,
was pressing her, with all his strength, against him. Already her hands
slipped off him, and she whispered, “Don’t you hurt--” Her face had no
expression. It stared at the intruder and never saw him. Then her lover
kissed it, and immediately it shone with mysterious beauty, like some
star.

Rickie limped away without the sandwiches, crimson and afraid. He
thought, “Do such things actually happen?” and he seemed to be looking
down coloured valleys. Brighter they glowed, till gods of pure flame
were born in them, and then he was looking at pinnacles of virgin snow.
While Mr. Pembroke talked, the riot of fair images increased.

They invaded his being and lit lamps at unsuspected shrines. Their
orchestra commenced in that suburban house, where he had to stand aside
for the maid to carry in the luncheon. Music flowed past him like
a river. He stood at the springs of creation and heard the primeval
monotony. Then an obscure instrument gave out a little phrase.

The river continued unheeding. The phrase was repeated and a listener
might know it was a fragment of the Tune of tunes. Nobler instruments
accepted it, the clarionet protected, the brass encouraged, and it rose
to the surface to the whisper of violins. In full unison was Love born,
flame of the flame, flushing the dark river beneath him and the virgin
snows above. His wings were infinite, his youth eternal; the sun was
a jewel on his finger as he passed it in benediction over the world.
Creation, no longer monotonous, acclaimed him, in widening melody, in
brighter radiances. Was Love a column of fire? Was he a torrent of song?
Was he greater than either--the touch of a man on a woman?

It was the merest accident that Rickie had not been disgusted. But this
he could not know.

Mr. Pembroke, when he called the two dawdlers into lunch, was aware of a
hand on his arm and a voice that murmured, “Don’t--they may be happy.”

He stared, and struck the gong. To its music they approached, priest and
high priestess.

“Rickie, can I give these sandwiches to the boot boy?” said the one. “He
would love them.”

“The gong! Be quick! The gong!”

“Are you smoking before lunch?” said the other.

But they had got into heaven, and nothing could get them out of it.
Others might think them surly or prosaic. He knew. He could remember
every word they spoke. He would treasure every motion, every glance of
either, and so in time to come, when the gates of heaven had shut, some
faint radiance, some echo of wisdom might remain with him outside.

As a matter of fact, he saw them very little during his visit. He
checked himself because he was unworthy. What right had he to pry, even
in the spirit, upon their bliss? It was no crime to have seen them
on the lawn. It would be a crime to go to it again. He tried to keep
himself and his thoughts away, not because he was ascetic, but because
they would not like it if they knew. This behaviour of his suited them
admirably. And when any gracious little thing occurred to them--any
little thing that his sympathy had contrived and allowed--they put it
down to chance or to each other.

So the lovers fall into the background. They are part of the distant
sunrise, and only the mountains speak to them. Rickie talks to Mr.
Pembroke, amidst the unlit valleys of our over-habitable world.



IV

Sawston School had been founded by a tradesman in the seventeenth
century. It was then a tiny grammar-school in a tiny town, and the City
Company who governed it had to drive half a day through the woods and
heath on the occasion of their annual visit. In the twentieth century
they still drove, but only from the railway station; and found
themselves not in a tiny town, nor yet in a large one, but amongst
innumerable residences, detached and semi-detached, which had gathered
round the school. For the intentions of the founder had been altered, or
at all events amplified, instead of educating the “poore of my home,”
 he now educated the upper classes of England. The change had taken place
not so very far back. Till the nineteenth century the grammar-school was
still composed of day scholars from the neighbourhood. Then two things
happened. Firstly, the school’s property rose in value, and it became
rich. Secondly, for no obvious reason, it suddenly emitted a quantity
of bishops. The bishops, like the stars from a Roman candle, were
all colours, and flew in all directions, some high, some low, some to
distant colonies, one into the Church of Rome. But many a father traced
their course in the papers; many a mother wondered whether her son, if
properly ignited, might not burn as bright; many a family moved to the
place where living and education were so cheap, where day-boys were not
looked down upon, and where the orthodox and the up-to-date were said to
be combined. The school doubled its numbers. It built new class-rooms,
laboratories and a gymnasium. It dropped the prefix “Grammar.” It coaxed
the sons of the local tradesmen into a new foundation, the “Commercial
School,” built a couple of miles away. And it started boarding-houses.
It had not the gracious antiquity of Eton or Winchester, nor, on the
other hand, had it a conscious policy like Lancing, Wellington, and
other purely modern foundations. Where tradition served, it clung to
them. Where new departures seemed desirable, they were made. It aimed
at producing the average Englishman, and, to a very great extent, it
succeeded.

Here Mr. Pembroke passed his happy and industrious life. His technical
position was that of master to a form low down on the Modern Side. But
his work lay elsewhere. He organized. If no organization existed,
he would create one. If one did exist, he would modify it. “An
organization,” he would say, “is after all not an end in itself. It must
contribute to a movement.” When one good custom seemed likely to
corrupt the school, he was ready with another; he believed that without
innumerable customs there was no safety, either for boys or men.

Perhaps he is right, and always will be right. Perhaps each of us
would go to ruin if for one short hour we acted as we thought fit, and
attempted the service of perfect freedom. The school caps, with their
elaborate symbolism, were his; his the many-tinted bathing-drawers,
that showed how far a boy could swim; his the hierarchy of jerseys and
blazers. It was he who instituted Bounds, and call, and the two sorts
of exercise-paper, and the three sorts of caning, and “The Sawtonian,” a
bi-terminal magazine. His plump finger was in every pie. The dome of
his skull, mild but impressive, shone at every master’s meeting. He was
generally acknowledged to be the coming man.

His last achievement had been the organization of the day-boys. They had
been left too much to themselves, and were weak in esprit de corps;
they were apt to regard home, not school, as the most important thing
in their lives. Moreover, they got out of their parents’ hands; they did
their preparation any time and some times anyhow. They shirked games,
they were out at all hours, they ate what they should not, they smoked,
they bicycled on the asphalt. Now all was over. Like boarders, they
were to be in at 7:15 P.M., and were not allowed out after unless with
a written order from their parent or guardian; they, too, must work at
fixed hours in the evening, and before breakfast next morning from 7 to
8. Games were compulsory. They must not go to parties in term time.
They must keep to bounds. Of course the reform was not complete. It
was impossible to control the dieting, though, on a printed circular,
day-parents were implored to provide simple food. And it is also
believed that some mothers disobeyed the rule about preparation, and
allowed their sons to do all the work over-night and have a longer
sleep in the morning. But the gulf between day-boys and boarders was
considerably lessened, and grew still narrower when the day-boys too
were organized into a House with house-master and colours of their own.
“Through the House,” said Mr. Pembroke, “one learns patriotism for
the school, just as through the school one learns patriotism for the
country. Our only course, therefore, is to organize the day-boys into
a House.” The headmaster agreed, as he often did, and the new community
was formed. Mr. Pembroke, to avoid the tongues of malice, had refused
the post of house-master for himself, saying to Mr. Jackson, who taught
the sixth, “You keep too much in the background. Here is a chance for
you.” But this was a failure. Mr. Jackson, a scholar and a student,
neither felt nor conveyed any enthusiasm, and when confronted with his
House, would say, “Well, I don’t know what we’re all here for. Now I
should think you’d better go home to your mothers.” He returned to his
background, and next term Mr. Pembroke was to take his place.

Such were the themes on which Mr. Pembroke discoursed to Rickie’s civil
ear. He showed him the school, and the library, and the subterranean
hall where the day-boys might leave their coats and caps, and where, on
festal occasions, they supped. He showed him Mr. Jackson’s pretty house,
and whispered, “Were it not for his brilliant intellect, it would be a
case of Quickmarch!” He showed him the racquet-court, happily completed,
and the chapel, unhappily still in need of funds. Rickie was impressed,
but then he was impressed by everything. Of course a House of day-boys
seemed a little shadowy after Agnes and Gerald, but he imparted some
reality even to that.

“The racquet-court,” said Mr. Pembroke, “is most gratifying. We never
expected to manage it this year. But before the Easter holidays every
boy received a subscription card, and was given to understand that he
must collect thirty shillings. You will scarcely believe me, but they
nearly all responded. Next term there was a dinner in the great school,
and all who had collected, not thirty shillings, but as much as a
pound, were invited to it--for naturally one was not precise for a few
shillings, the response being the really valuable thing. Practically the
whole school had to come.”

“They must enjoy the court tremendously.”

“Ah, it isn’t used very much. Racquets, as I daresay you know, is rather
an expensive game. Only the wealthier boys play--and I’m sorry to say
that it is not of our wealthier boys that we are always the proudest.
But the point is that no public school can be called first-class until
it has one. They are building them right and left.”

“And now you must finish the chapel?”

“Now we must complete the chapel.” He paused reverently, and said, “And
here is a fragment of the original building.” Rickie at once had a rush
of sympathy. He, too, looked with reverence at the morsel of Jacobean
brickwork, ruddy and beautiful amidst the machine-squared stones of the
modern apse. The two men, who had so little in common, were thrilled
with patriotism. They rejoiced that their country was great, noble, and
old.

“Thank God I’m English,” said Rickie suddenly.

“Thank Him indeed,” said Mr. Pembroke, laying a hand on his back.

“We’ve been nearly as great as the Greeks, I do believe. Greater, I’m
sure, than the Italians, though they did get closer to beauty. Greater
than the French, though we do take all their ideas. I can’t help
thinking that England is immense. English literature certainly.”

Mr. Pembroke removed his hand. He found such patriotism somewhat craven.
Genuine patriotism comes only from the heart. It knows no parleying with
reason. English ladies will declare abroad that there are no fogs in
London, and Mr. Pembroke, though he would not go to this, was only
restrained by the certainty of being found out. On this occasion
he remarked that the Greeks lacked spiritual insight, and had a low
conception of woman.

“As to women--oh! there they were dreadful,” said Rickie, leaning his
hand on the chapel. “I realize that more and more. But as to spiritual
insight, I don’t quite like to say; and I find Plato too difficult, but
I know men who don’t, and I fancy they mightn’t agree with you.”

“Far be it from me to disparage Plato. And for philosophy as a whole I
have the greatest respect. But it is the crown of a man’s education,
not the foundation. Myself, I read it with the utmost profit, but I have
known endless trouble result from boys who attempt it too soon, before
they were set.”

“But if those boys had died first,” cried Rickie with sudden vehemence,
“without knowing what there is to know--”

“Or isn’t to know!” said Mr. Pembroke sarcastically.

“Or what there isn’t to know. Exactly. That’s it.”

“My dear Rickie, what do you mean? If an old friend may be frank, you
are talking great rubbish.” And, with a few well-worn formulae, he
propped up the young man’s orthodoxy. The props were unnecessary. Rickie
had his own equilibrium. Neither the Revivalism that assails a boy at
about the age of fifteen, nor the scepticism that meets him five years
later, could sway him from his allegiance to the church into which he
had been born. But his equilibrium was personal, and the secret of it
useless to others. He desired that each man should find his own.

“What does philosophy do?” the propper continued. “Does it make a man
happier in life? Does it make him die more peacefully? I fancy that in
the long-run Herbert Spencer will get no further than the rest of us.
Ah, Rickie! I wish you could move among the school boys, and see their
healthy contempt for all they cannot touch!” Here he was going too far,
and had to add, “Their spiritual capacities, of course, are another
matter.” Then he remembered the Greeks, and said, “Which proves my
original statement.”

Submissive signs, as of one propped, appeared in Rickie’s face.
Mr. Pembroke then questioned him about the men who found Plato not
difficult. But here he kept silence, patting the school chapel gently,
and presently the conversation turned to topics with which they were
both more competent to deal.

“Does Agnes take much interest in the school?”

“Not as much as she did. It is the result of her engagement. If our
naughty soldier had not carried her off, she might have made an ideal
schoolmaster’s wife. I often chaff him about it, for he a little
despises the intellectual professions. Natural, perfectly natural. How
can a man who faces death feel as we do towards mensa or tupto?”

“Perfectly true. Absolutely true.”

Mr. Pembroke remarked to himself that Frederick was improving.

“If a man shoots straight and hits straight and speaks straight, if his
heart is in the right place, if he has the instincts of a Christian
and a gentleman--then I, at all events, ask no better husband for my
sister.”

“How could you get a better?” he cried. “Do you remember the thing in
‘The Clouds’?” And he quoted, as well as he could, from the invitation
of the Dikaios Logos, the description of the young Athenian, perfect in
body, placid in mind, who neglects his work at the Bar and trains all
day among the woods and meadows, with a garland on his head and a friend
to set the pace; the scent of new leaves is upon them; they rejoice in
the freshness of spring; over their heads the plane-tree whispers to the
elm, perhaps the most glorious invitation to the brainless life that has
ever been given.

“Yes, yes,” said Mr. Pembroke, who did not want a brother-in-law out of
Aristophanes. Nor had he got one, for Mr. Dawes would not have bothered
over the garland or noticed the spring, and would have complained that
the friend ran too slowly or too fast.

“And as for her--!” But he could think of no classical parallel for
Agnes. She slipped between examples. A kindly Medea, a Cleopatra with a
sense of duty--these suggested her a little. She was not born in Greece,
but came overseas to it--a dark, intelligent princess. With all her
splendour, there were hints of splendour still hidden--hints of an
older, richer, and more mysterious land. He smiled at the idea of her
being “not there.” Ansell, clever as he was, had made a bad blunder. She
had more reality than any other woman in the world.

Mr. Pembroke looked pleased at this boyish enthusiasm. He was fond of
his sister, though he knew her to be full of faults. “Yes, I envy her,”
 he said. “She has found a worthy helpmeet for life’s journey, I do
believe. And though they chafe at the long engagement, it is a blessing
in disguise. They learn to know each other thoroughly before contracting
more intimate ties.”

Rickie did not assent. The length of the engagement seemed to him
unspeakably cruel. Here were two people who loved each other, and they
could not marry for years because they had no beastly money. Not all
Herbert’s pious skill could make this out a blessing. It was bad enough
being “so rich” at the Silts; here he was more ashamed of it than ever.
In a few weeks he would come of age and his money be his own. What a
pity things were so crookedly arranged. He did not want money, or at all
events he did not want so much.

“Suppose,” he meditated, for he became much worried over this,--“suppose
I had a hundred pounds a year less than I shall have. Well, I should
still have enough. I don’t want anything but food, lodging, clothes,
and now and then a railway fare. I haven’t any tastes. I don’t collect
anything or play games. Books are nice to have, but after all there is
Mudie’s, or if it comes to that, the Free Library. Oh, my profession! I
forgot I shall have a profession. Well, that will leave me with more to
spare than ever.” And he supposed away till he lost touch with the world
and with what it permits, and committed an unpardonable sin.

It happened towards the end of his visit--another airless day of that
mild January. Mr. Dawes was playing against a scratch team of cads, and
had to go down to the ground in the morning to settle something. Rickie
proposed to come too.

Hitherto he had been no nuisance. “You will be frightfully bored,” said
Agnes, observing the cloud on her lover’s face. “And Gerald walks like a
maniac.”

“I had a little thought of the Museum this morning,” said Mr. Pembroke.
“It is very strong in flint arrow-heads.”

“Ah, that’s your line, Rickie. I do envy you and Herbert the way you
enjoy the past.”

“I almost think I’ll go with Dawes, if he’ll have me. I can walk quite
fast just to the ground and back. Arrowheads are wonderful, but I don’t
really enjoy them yet, though I hope I shall in time.”

Mr. Pembroke was offended, but Rickie held firm.

In a quarter of an hour he was back at the house alone, nearly crying.

“Oh, did the wretch go too fast?” called Miss Pembroke from her bedroom
window.

“I went too fast for him.” He spoke quite sharply, and before he had
time to say he was sorry and didn’t mean exactly that, the window had
shut.

“They’ve quarrelled,” she thought. “Whatever about?”

She soon heard. Gerald returned in a cold stormy temper. Rickie had
offered him money.

“My dear fellow don’t be so cross. The child’s mad.”

“If it was, I’d forgive that. But I can’t stand unhealthiness.”

“Now, Gerald, that’s where I hate you. You don’t know what it is to pity
the weak.”

“Woman’s job. So you wish I’d taken a hundred pounds a year from him.
Did you ever hear such blasted cheek? Marry us--he, you, and me--a
hundred pounds down and as much annual--he, of course, to pry into all
we did, and we to kowtow and eat dirt-pie to him. If that’s Mr. Rickety
Elliot’s idea of a soldier and an Englishman, it isn’t mine, and I wish
I’d had a horse-whip.”

She was roaring with laughter. “You’re babies, a pair of you, and you’re
the worst. Why couldn’t you let the little silly down gently? There he
was puffing and sniffing under my window, and I thought he’d insulted
you. Why didn’t you accept?”

“Accept?” he thundered.

“It would have taken the nonsense out of him for ever. Why, he was only
talking out of a book.”

“More fool he.”

“Well, don’t be angry with a fool. He means no harm. He muddles all day
with poetry and old dead people, and then tries to bring it into life.
It’s too funny for words.”

Gerald repeated that he could not stand unhealthiness.

“I don’t call that exactly unhealthy.”

“I do. And why he could give the money’s worse.”

“What do you mean?”

He became shy. “I hadn’t meant to tell you. It’s not quite for a lady.”
 For, like most men who are rather animal, he was intellectually a prude.
“He says he can’t ever marry, owing to his foot. It wouldn’t be fair to
posterity. His grandfather was crocked, his father too, and he’s as bad.
He thinks that it’s hereditary, and may get worse next generation. He’s
discussed it all over with other Undergrads. A bright lot they must be.
He daren’t risk having any children. Hence the hundred quid.”

She stopped laughing. “Oh, little beast, if he said all that!”

He was encouraged to proceed. Hitherto he had not talked about their
school days. Now he told her everything,--the “barley-sugar,” as he
called it, the pins in chapel, and how one afternoon he had tied him
head-downward on to a tree trunk and then ran away--of course only for a
moment.

For this she scolded him well. But she had a thrill of joy when she
thought of the weak boy in the clutches of the strong one.



V

Gerald died that afternoon. He was broken up in the football match.
Rickie and Mr. Pembroke were on the ground when the accident took place.
It was no good torturing him by a drive to the hospital, and he was
merely carried to the little pavilion and laid upon the floor. A doctor
came, and so did a clergyman, but it seemed better to leave him for the
last few minutes with Agnes, who had ridden down on her bicycle.

It was a strange lamentable interview. The girl was so accustomed to
health, that for a time she could not understand. It must be a joke that
he chose to lie there in the dust, with a rug over him and his knees
bent up towards his chin. His arms were as she knew them, and their
admirable muscles showed clear and clean beneath the jersey. The face,
too, though a little flushed, was uninjured: it must be some curious
joke.

“Gerald, what have you been doing?”

He replied, “I can’t see you. It’s too dark.”

“Oh, I’ll soon alter that,” she said in her old brisk way. She opened
the pavilion door. The people who were standing by it moved aside. She
saw a deserted meadow, steaming and grey, and beyond it slateroofed
cottages, row beside row, climbing a shapeless hill. Towards London the
sky was yellow. “There. That’s better.” She sat down by him again, and
drew his hand into her own. “Now we are all right, aren’t we?”

“Where are you?”

This time she could not reply.

“What is it? Where am I going?”

“Wasn’t the rector here?” said she after a silence.

“He explained heaven, and thinks that I--but--I couldn’t tell a parson;
but I don’t seem to have any use for any of the things there.”

“We are Christians,” said Agnes shyly. “Dear love, we don’t talk about
these things, but we believe them. I think that you will get well and
be as strong again as ever; but, in any case, there is a spiritual life,
and we know that some day you and I--”

“I shan’t do as a spirit,” he interrupted, sighing pitifully. “I want
you as I am, and it cannot be managed. The rector had to say so. I
want--I don’t want to talk. I can’t see you. Shut that door.”

She obeyed, and crept into his arms. Only this time her grasp was the
stronger. Her heart beat louder and louder as the sound of his grew more
faint. He was crying like a little frightened child, and her lips were
wet with his tears. “Bear it bravely,” she told him.

“I can’t,” he whispered. “It isn’t to be done. I can’t see you,” and
passed from her trembling with open eyes.

She rode home on her bicycle, leaving the others to follow. Some ladies
who did not know what had happened bowed and smiled as she passed, and
she returned their salute.

“Oh, miss, is it true?” cried the cook, her face streaming with tears.

Agnes nodded. Presumably it was true. Letters had just arrived: one
was for Gerald from his mother. Life, which had given them no warning,
seemed to make no comment now. The incident was outside nature, and
would surely pass away like a dream. She felt slightly irritable, and
the grief of the servants annoyed her.

They sobbed. “Ah, look at his marks! Ah, little he thought--little he
thought!” In the brown holland strip by the front door a heavy football
boot had left its impress. They had not liked Gerald, but he was a man,
they were women, he had died. Their mistress ordered them to leave her.

For many minutes she sat at the foot of the stairs, rubbing her eyes. An
obscure spiritual crisis was going on.

Should she weep like the servants? Or should she bear up and trust in
the consoler Time? Was the death of a man so terrible after all? As she
invited herself to apathy there were steps on the gravel, and Rickie
Elliot burst in. He was splashed with mud, his breath was gone, and
his hair fell wildly over his meagre face. She thought, “These are the
people who are left alive!” From the bottom of her soul she hated him.

“I came to see what you’re doing,” he cried.

“Resting.”

He knelt beside her, and she said, “Would you please go away?”

“Yes, dear Agnes, of course; but I must see first that you mind.” Her
breath caught. Her eves moved to the treads, going outwards, so firmly,
so irretrievably.

He panted, “It’s the worst thing that can ever happen to you in all
your life, and you’ve got to mind it you’ve got to mind it. They’ll come
saying, ‘Bear up trust to time.’ No, no; they’re wrong. Mind it.”

Through all her misery she knew that this boy was greater than they
supposed. He rose to his feet, and with intense conviction cried: “But
I know--I understand. It’s your death as well as his. He’s gone, Agnes,
and his arms will never hold you again. In God’s name, mind such a
thing, and don’t sit fencing with your soul. Don’t stop being great;
that’s the one crime he’ll never forgive you.”

She faltered, “Who--who forgives?”

“Gerald.”

At the sound of his name she slid forward, and all her dishonesty left
her. She acknowledged that life’s meaning had vanished. Bending down,
she kissed the footprint. “How can he forgive me?” she sobbed. “Where
has he gone to? You could never dream such an awful thing. He couldn’t
see me though I opened the door--wide--plenty of light; and then he
could not remember the things that should comfort him. He wasn’t a--he
wasn’t ever a great reader, and he couldn’t remember the things. The
rector tried, and he couldn’t--I came, and I couldn’t--” She could not
speak for tears. Rickie did not check her. He let her accuse herself,
and fate, and Herbert, who had postponed their marriage. She might have
been a wife six months; but Herbert had spoken of self-control and of
all life before them. He let her kiss the footprints till their marks
gave way to the marks of her lips. She moaned. “He is gone--where is
he?” and then he replied quite quietly, “He is in heaven.”

She begged him not to comfort her; she could not bear it.

“I did not come to comfort you. I came to see that you mind. He is in
heaven, Agnes. The greatest thing is over.”

Her hatred was lulled. She murmured, “Dear Rickie!” and held up her hand
to him. Through her tears his meagre face showed as a seraph’s who spoke
the truth and forbade her to juggle with her soul. “Dear Rickie--but for
the rest of my life what am I to do?”

“Anything--if you remember that the greatest thing is over.”

“I don’t know you,” she said tremulously. “You have grown up in a
moment. You never talked to us, and yet you understand it all. Tell me
again--I can only trust you--where he is.”

“He is in heaven.”

“You are sure?”

It puzzled her that Rickie, who could scarcely tell you the time without
a saving clause, should be so certain about immortality.



VI

He did not stop for the funeral. Mr. Pembroke thought that he had a bad
effect on Agnes, and prevented her from acquiescing in the tragedy as
rapidly as she might have done. As he expressed it, “one must not court
sorrow,” and he hinted to the young man that they desired to be alone.

Rickie went back to the Silts.

He was only there a few days. As soon as term opened he returned to
Cambridge, for which he longed passionately. The journey thither was now
familiar to him, and he took pleasure in each landmark. The fair valley
of Tewin Water, the cutting into Hitchin where the train traverses the
chalk, Baldock Church, Royston with its promise of downs, were nothing
in themselves, but dear as stages in the pilgrimage towards the abode
of peace. On the platform he met friends. They had all had pleasant
vacations: it was a happy world. The atmosphere alters.

Cambridge, according to her custom, welcomed her sons with open drains.
Pettycury was up, so was Trinity Street, and navvies peeped out of
King’s Parade. Here it was gas, there electric light, but everywhere
something, and always a smell. It was also the day that the wheels fell
off the station tram, and Rickie, who was naturally inside, was among
the passengers who “sustained no injury but a shock, and had as hearty a
laugh over the mishap afterwards as any one.”

Tilliard fled into a hansom, cursing himself for having tried to do the
thing cheaply. Hornblower also swept past yelling derisively, with his
luggage neatly piled above his head. “Let’s get out and walk,” muttered
Ansell. But Rickie was succouring a distressed female--Mrs. Aberdeen.

“Oh, Mrs. Aberdeen, I never saw you: I am so glad to see you--I am so
very glad.” Mrs. Aberdeen was cold. She did not like being spoken to
outside the college, and was also distrait about her basket. Hitherto
no genteel eye had even seen inside it, but in the collision its little
calico veil fell off, and there was revealed--nothing. The basket was
empty, and never would hold anything illegal. All the same she was
distrait, and “We shall meet later, sir, I dessy,” was all the greeting
Rickie got from her.

“Now what kind of a life has Mrs. Aberdeen?” he exclaimed, as he and
Ansell pursued the Station Road. “Here these bedders come and make us
comfortable. We owe an enormous amount to them, their wages are absurd,
and we know nothing about them. Off they go to Barnwell, and then their
lives are hidden. I just know that Mrs. Aberdeen has a husband, but
that’s all. She never will talk about him. Now I do so want to fill in
her life. I see one-half of it. What’s the other half? She may have a
real jolly house, in good taste, with a little garden and books, and
pictures. Or, again, she mayn’t. But in any case one ought to know. I
know she’d dislike it, but she oughtn’t to dislike. After all, bedders
are to blame for the present lamentable state of things, just as much as
gentlefolk. She ought to want me to come. She ought to introduce me to
her husband.”

They had reached the corner of Hills Road. Ansell spoke for the first
time. He said, “Ugh!”

“Drains?”

“Yes. A spiritual cesspool.”

Rickie laughed.

“I expected it from your letter.”

“The one you never answered?”

“I answer none of your letters. You are quite hopeless by now. You can
go to the bad. But I refuse to accompany you. I refuse to believe that
every human being is a moving wonder of supreme interest and tragedy and
beauty--which was what the letter in question amounted to. You’ll find
plenty who will believe it. It’s a very popular view among people
who are too idle to think; it saves them the trouble of detecting the
beautiful from the ugly, the interesting from the dull, the tragic from
the melodramatic. You had just come from Sawston, and were apparently
carried away by the fact that Miss Pembroke had the usual amount of arms
and legs.”

Rickie was silent. He had told his friend how he felt, but not what had
happened. Ansell could discuss love and death admirably, but somehow he
would not understand lovers or a dying man, and in the letter there had
been scant allusion to these concrete facts. Would Cambridge understand
them either? He watched some dons who were peeping into an excavation,
and throwing up their hands with humorous gestures of despair. These
men would lecture next week on Catiline’s conspiracy, on Luther, on
Evolution, on Catullus. They dealt with so much and they had experienced
so little. Was it possible he would ever come to think Cambridge narrow?
In his short life Rickie had known two sudden deaths, and that is enough
to disarrange any placid outlook on the world. He knew once for all
that we are all of us bubbles on an extremely rough sea. Into this sea
humanity has built, as it were, some little breakwaters--scientific
knowledge, civilized restraint--so that the bubbles do not break so
frequently or so soon. But the sea has not altered, and it was only a
chance that he, Ansell, Tilliard, and Mrs. Aberdeen had not all been
killed in the tram.

They waited for the other tram by the Roman Catholic Church, whose
florid bulk was already receding into twilight. It is the first big
building that the incoming visitor sees. “Oh, here come the colleges!”
 cries the Protestant parent, and then learns that it was built by a
Papist who made a fortune out of movable eyes for dolls. “Built out of
doll’s eyes to contain idols”--that, at all events, is the legend and
the joke. It watches over the apostate city, taller by many a yard than
anything within, and asserting, however wildly, that here is eternity,
stability, and bubbles unbreakable upon a windless sea.

A costly hymn tune announced five o’clock, and in the distance the more
lovable note of St. Mary’s could be heard, speaking from the heart of
the town. Then the tram arrived--the slow stuffy tram that plies every
twenty minutes between the unknown and the marketplace--and took them
past the desecrated grounds of Downing, past Addenbrookes Hospital, girt
like a Venetian palace with a mantling canal, past the Fitz William,
towering upon immense substructions like any Roman temple, right up to
the gates of one’s own college, which looked like nothing else in the
world. The porters were glad to see them, but wished it had been a
hansom. “Our luggage,” explained Rickie, “comes in the hotel omnibus, if
you would kindly pay a shilling for mine.” Ansell turned aside to some
large lighted windows, the abode of a hospitable don, and from other
windows there floated familiar voices and the familiar mistakes in a
Beethoven sonata. The college, though small, was civilized, and proud of
its civilization. It was not sufficient glory to be a Blue there, nor
an additional glory to get drunk. Many a maiden lady who had read
that Cambridge men were sad dogs, was surprised and perhaps a little
disappointed at the reasonable life which greeted her. Miss Appleblossom
in particular had had a tremendous shock. The sight of young fellows
making tea and drinking water had made her wonder whether this was
Cambridge College at all. “It is so,” she exclaimed afterwards. “It is
just as I say; and what’s more, I wouldn’t have it otherwise; Stewart
says it’s as easy as easy to get into the swim, and not at all
expensive.” The direction of the swim was determined a little by the
genius of the place--for places have a genius, though the less we talk
about it the better--and a good deal by the tutors and resident fellows,
who treated with rare dexterity the products that came up yearly
from the public schools. They taught the perky boy that he was not
everything, and the limp boy that he might be something. They even
welcomed those boys who were neither limp nor perky, but odd--those boys
who had never been at a public school at all, and such do not find a
welcome everywhere. And they did everything with ease--one might almost
say with nonchalance, so that the boys noticed nothing, and received
education, often for the first time in their lives.

But Rickie turned to none of these friends, for just then he loved his
rooms better than any person. They were all he really possessed in the
world, the only place he could call his own. Over the door was his name,
and through the paint, like a grey ghost, he could still read the name
of his predecessor. With a sigh of joy he entered the perishable home
that was his for a couple of years. There was a beautiful fire, and
the kettle boiled at once. He made tea on the hearth-rug and ate the
biscuits which Mrs. Aberdeen had brought for him up from Anderson’s.
“Gentlemen,” she said, “must learn to give and take.” He sighed again
and again, like one who had escaped from danger. With his head on the
fender and all his limbs relaxed, he felt almost as safe as he felt once
when his mother killed a ghost in the passage by carrying him through
it in her arms. There was no ghost now; he was frightened at reality; he
was frightened at the splendours and horrors of the world.

A letter from Miss Pembroke was on the table. He did not hurry to open
it, for she, and all that she did, was overwhelming. She wrote like
the Sibyl; her sorrowful face moved over the stars and shattered their
harmonies; last night he saw her with the eyes of Blake, a virgin widow,
tall, veiled, consecrated, with her hands stretched out against an
everlasting wind. Why should she write? Her letters were not for the
likes of him, nor to be read in rooms like his.

“We are not leaving Sawston,” she wrote. “I saw how selfish it was of
me to risk spoiling Herbert’s career. I shall get used to any place.
Now that he is gone, nothing of that sort can matter. Every one has been
most kind, but you have comforted me most, though you did not mean to. I
cannot think how you did it, or understood so much. I still think of you
as a little boy with a lame leg,--I know you will let me say this,--and
yet when it came to the point you knew more than people who have been
all their lives with sorrow and death.”

Rickie burnt this letter, which he ought not to have done, for it was
one of the few tributes Miss Pembroke ever paid to imagination. But
he felt that it did not belong to him: words so sincere should be for
Gerald alone. The smoke rushed up the chimney, and he indulged in a
vision. He saw it reach the outer air and beat against the low ceiling
of clouds. The clouds were too strong for it; but in them was one chink,
revealing one star, and through this the smoke escaped into the light
of stars innumerable. Then--but then the vision failed, and the voice of
science whispered that all smoke remains on earth in the form of smuts,
and is troublesome to Mrs. Aberdeen.

“I am jolly unpractical,” he mused. “And what is the point of it when
real things are so wonderful? Who wants visions in a world that has
Agnes and Gerald?” He turned on the electric light and pulled open
the table-drawer. There, among spoons and corks and string, he found a
fragment of a little story that he had tried to write last term. It was
called “The Bay of the Fifteen Islets,” and the action took place on St.
John’s Eve off the coast of Sicily. A party of tourists land on one of
the islands. Suddenly the boatmen become uneasy, and say that the island
is not generally there. It is an extra one, and they had better have tea
on one of the ordinaries. “Pooh, volcanic!” says the leading tourist,
and the ladies say how interesting. The island begins to rock, and so
do the minds of its visitors. They start and quarrel and jabber. Fingers
burst up through the sand-black fingers of sea devils. The island tilts.
The tourists go mad. But just before the catastrophe one man, integer
vitae scelerisque purus, sees the truth. Here are no devils. Other
muscles, other minds, are pulling the island to its subterranean home.
Through the advancing wall of waters he sees no grisly faces, no
ghastly medieval limbs, but--But what nonsense! When real things are so
wonderful, what is the point of pretending?

And so Rickie deflected his enthusiasms. Hitherto they had played on
gods and heroes, on the infinite and the impossible, on virtue and
beauty and strength. Now, with a steadier radiance, they transfigured a
man who was dead and a woman who was still alive.



VII

Love, say orderly people, can be fallen into by two methods: (1) through
the desires, (2) through the imagination. And if the orderly people are
English, they add that (1) is the inferior method, and characteristic
of the South. It is inferior. Yet those who pursue it at all events
know what they want; they are not puzzling to themselves or ludicrous
to others; they do not take the wings of the morning and fly into the
uttermost parts of the sea before walking to the registry office; they
cannot breed a tragedy quite like Rickie’s.

He is, of course, absurdly young--not twenty-one and he will be engaged
to be married at twenty-three. He has no knowledge of the world; for
example, he thinks that if you do not want money you can give it to
friends who do. He believes in humanity because he knows a dozen decent
people. He believes in women because he has loved his mother. And his
friends are as young and as ignorant as himself. They are full of the
wine of life. But they have not tasted the cup--let us call it the
teacup--of experience, which has made men of Mr. Pembroke’s type what
they are. Oh, that teacup! To be taken at prayers, at friendship, at
love, till we are quite sane, efficient, quite experienced, and quite
useless to God or man. We must drink it, or we shall die. But we need
not drink it always. Here is our problem and our salvation. There comes
a moment--God knows when--at which we can say, “I will experience no
longer. I will create. I will be an experience.” But to do this we must
be both acute and heroic. For it is not easy, after accepting six cups
of tea, to throw the seventh in the face of the hostess. And to Rickie
this moment has not, as yet, been offered.

Ansell, at the end of his third year, got a first in the Moral Science
Tripos. Being a scholar, he kept his rooms in college, and at once
began to work for a Fellowship. Rickie got a creditable second in the
Classical Tripos, Part I., and retired to sallow lodgings in Mill bane,
carrying with him the degree of B.A. and a small exhibition, which was
quite as much as he deserved. For Part II. he read Greek Archaeology,
and got a second. All this means that Ansell was much cleverer than
Rickie. As for the cow, she was still going strong, though turning a
little academic as the years passed over her.

“We are bound to get narrow,” sighed Rickie. He and his friend were
lying in a meadow during their last summer term. In his incurable love
for flowers he had plaited two garlands of buttercups and cow-parsley,
and Ansell’s lean Jewish face was framed in one of them. “Cambridge is
wonderful, but--but it’s so tiny. You have no idea--at least, I think
you have no idea--how the great world looks down on it.”

“I read the letters in the papers.”

“It’s a bad look-out.”

“How?”

“Cambridge has lost touch with the times.”

“Was she ever intended to touch them?”

“She satisfies,” said Rickie mysteriously, “neither the professions, nor
the public schools, nor the great thinking mass of men and women. There
is a general feeling that her day is over, and naturally one feels
pretty sick.”

“Do you still write short stories?”

“Because your English has gone to the devil. You think and talk in
Journalese. Define a great thinking mass.”

Rickie sat up and adjusted his floral crown.

“Estimate the worth of a general feeling.”

Silence.

“And thirdly, where is the great world?”

“Oh that--!”

“Yes. That,” exclaimed Ansell, rising from his couch in violent
excitement. “Where is it? How do you set about finding it? How long does
it take to get there? What does it think? What does it do? What does
it want? Oblige me with specimens of its art and literature.” Silence.
“Till you do, my opinions will be as follows: There is no great world at
all, only a little earth, for ever isolated from the rest of the little
solar system. The earth is full of tiny societies, and Cambridge is one
of them. All the societies are narrow, but some are good and some are
bad--just as one house is beautiful inside and another ugly. Observe the
metaphor of the houses: I am coming back to it. The good societies say,
`I tell you to do this because I am Cambridge.’ The bad ones say, `I
tell you to do that because I am the great world, not because I am
‘Peckham,’ or `Billingsgate,’ or `Park Lane,’ but `because I am the
great world.’ They lie. And fools like you listen to them, and believe
that they are a thing which does not exist and never has existed, and
confuse ‘great,’ which has no meaning whatever, with ‘good,’ which means
salvation. Look at this great wreath: it’ll be dead tomorrow. Look
at that good flower: it’ll come up again next year. Now for the other
metaphor. To compare the world to Cambridge is like comparing the
outsides of houses with the inside of a house. No intellectual effort is
needed, no moral result is attained. You only have to say, ‘Oh, what
a difference!’ and then come indoors again and exhibit your broadened
mind.”

“I never shall come indoors again,” said Rickie. “That’s the whole
point.” And his voice began to quiver. “It’s well enough for those
who’ll get a Fellowship, but in a few weeks I shall go down. In a few
years it’ll be as if I’ve never been up. It matters very much to me what
the world is like. I can’t answer your questions about it; and that’s
no loss to you, but so much the worse for me. And then you’ve got a
house--not a metaphorical one, but a house with father and sisters. I
haven’t, and never shall have. There’ll never again be a home for me
like Cambridge. I shall only look at the outside of homes. According to
your metaphor, I shall live in the street, and it matters very much to
me what I find there.”

“You’ll live in another house right enough,” said Ansell, rather
uneasily. “Only take care you pick out a decent one. I can’t think
why you flop about so helplessly, like a bit of seaweed. In four years
you’ve taken as much root as any one.”

“Where?”

“I should say you’ve been fortunate in your friends.”

“Oh--that!” But he was not cynical--or cynical in a very tender way.
He was thinking of the irony of friendship--so strong it is, and so
fragile. We fly together, like straws in an eddy, to part in the open
stream. Nature has no use for us: she has cut her stuff differently.
Dutiful sons, loving husbands, responsible fathers these are what she
wants, and if we are friends it must be in our spare time. Abram and
Sarai were sorrowful, yet their seed became as sand of the sea, and
distracts the politics of Europe at this moment. But a few verses of
poetry is all that survives of David and Jonathan.

“I wish we were labelled,” said Rickie. He wished that all the
confidence and mutual knowledge that is born in such a place as
Cambridge could be organized. People went down into the world saying,
“We know and like each other; we shan’t forget.” But they did forget,
for man is so made that he cannot remember long without a symbol; he
wished there was a society, a kind of friendship office, where the
marriage of true minds could be registered.

“Why labels?”

“To know each other again.”

“I have taught you pessimism splendidly.” He looked at his watch.

“What time?”

“Not twelve.”

Rickie got up.

“Why go?” He stretched out his hand and caught hold of Rickie’s ankle.

“I’ve got that Miss Pembroke to lunch--that girl whom you say never’s
there.”

“Then why go? All this week you have pretended Miss Pembroke awaited
you. Wednesday--Miss Pembroke to lunch. Thursday--Miss Pembroke to tea.
Now again--and you didn’t even invite her.”

“To Cambridge, no. But the Hall man they’re stopping with has so many
engagements that she and her friend can often come to me, I’m glad to
say. I don’t think I ever told you much, but over two years ago the man
she was going to marry was killed at football. She nearly died of grief.
This visit to Cambridge is almost the first amusement she has felt up to
taking. Oh, they go back tomorrow! Give me breakfast tomorrow.”

“All right.”

“But I shall see you this evening. I shall be round at your paper on
Schopenhauer. Lemme go.”

“Don’t go,” he said idly. “It’s much better for you to talk to me.”

“Lemme go, Stewart.”

“It’s amusing that you’re so feeble. You--simply--can’t--get--away. I
wish I wanted to bully you.”

Rickie laughed, and suddenly over balanced into the grass. Ansell, with
unusual playfulness, held him prisoner. They lay there for few minutes,
talking and ragging aimlessly. Then Rickie seized his opportunity and
jerked away.

“Go, go!” yawned the other. But he was a little vexed, for he was a
young man with great capacity for pleasure, and it pleased him that
morning to be with his friend. The thought of two ladies waiting lunch
did not deter him; stupid women, why shouldn’t they wait? Why should
they interfere with their betters? With his ear on the ground he
listened to Rickie’s departing steps, and thought, “He wastes a lot of
time keeping engagements. Why will he be pleasant to fools?” And then
he thought, “Why has he turned so unhappy? It isn’t as it he’s a
philosopher, or tries to solve the riddle of existence. And he’s got
money of his own.” Thus thinking, he fell asleep.

Meanwhile Rickie hurried away from him, and slackened and stopped, and
hurried again. He was due at the Union in ten minutes, but he could not
bring himself there. He dared not meet Miss Pembroke: he loved her.

The devil must have planned it. They had started so gloriously; she had
been a goddess both in joy and sorrow. She was a goddess still. But
he had dethroned the god whom once he had glorified equally. Slowly,
slowly, the image of Gerald had faded. That was the first step. Rickie
had thought, “No matter. He will be bright again. Just now all the
radiance chances to be in her.” And on her he had fixed his eyes. He
thought of her awake. He entertained her willingly in dreams. He found
her in poetry and music and in the sunset. She made him kind and strong.
She made him clever. Through her he kept Cambridge in its proper place,
and lived as a citizen of the great world. But one night he dreamt
that she lay in his arms. This displeased him. He determined to think a
little about Gerald instead. Then the fabric collapsed.

It was hard on Rickie thus to meet the devil. He did not deserve it, for
he was comparatively civilized, and knew that there was nothing shameful
in love. But to love this woman! If only it had been any one else! Love
in return--that he could expect from no one, being too ugly and too
unattractive. But the love he offered would not then have been vile.
The insult to Miss Pembroke, who was consecrated, and whom he had
consecrated, who could still see Gerald, and always would see him,
shining on his everlasting throne this was the crime from the devil,
the crime that no penance would ever purge. She knew nothing. She never
would know. But the crime was registered in heaven.

He had been tempted to confide in Ansell. But to what purpose? He would
say, “I love Miss Pembroke.” and Stewart would reply, “You ass.” And
then. “I’m never going to tell her.” “You ass,” again. After all, it
was not a practical question; Agnes would never hear of his fall. If
his friend had been, as he expressed it, “labelled”; if he had been
a father, or still better a brother, one might tell him of the
discreditable passion. But why irritate him for no reason? Thinking “I
am always angling for sympathy; I must stop myself,” he hurried onward
to the Union.

He found his guests half way up the stairs, reading the advertisements
of coaches for the Long Vacation. He heard Mrs. Lewin say, “I wonder
what he’ll end by doing.” A little overacting his part, he apologized
nonchalantly for his lateness.

“It’s always the same,” cried Agnes. “Last time he forgot I was coming
altogether.” She wore a flowered muslin--something indescribably liquid
and cool. It reminded him a little of those swift piercing streams,
neither blue nor green, that gush out of the dolomites. Her face
was clear and brown, like the face of a mountaineer; her hair was so
plentiful that it seemed banked up above it; and her little toque,
though it answered the note of the dress, was almost ludicrous, poised
on so much natural glory. When she moved, the sunlight flashed on her
ear-rings.

He led them up to the luncheon-room. By now he was conscious of his
limitations as a host, and never attempted to entertain ladies in his
lodgings. Moreover, the Union seemed less intimate. It had a faint
flavour of a London club; it marked the undergraduate’s nearest approach
to the great world. Amid its waiters and serviettes one felt impersonal,
and able to conceal the private emotions. Rickie felt that if Miss
Pembroke knew one thing about him, she knew everything. During this
visit he took her to no place that he greatly loved.

“Sit down, ladies. Fall to. I’m sorry. I was out towards Coton with a
dreadful friend.”

Mrs. Lewin pushed up her veil. She was a typical May-term chaperon,
always pleasant, always hungry, and always tired. Year after year she
came up to Cambridge in a tight silk dress, and year after year she
nearly died of it. Her feet hurt, her limbs were cramped in a canoe,
black spots danced before her eyes from eating too much mayonnaise. But
still she came, if not as a mother as an aunt, if not as an aunt as a
friend. Still she ascended the roof of King’s, still she counted the
balls of Clare, still she was on the point of grasping the organization
of the May races. “And who is your friend?” she asked.

“His name is Ansell.”

“Well, now, did I see him two years ago--as a bedmaker in something they
did at the Foot Lights? Oh, how I roared.”

“You didn’t see Mr. Ansell at the Foot Lights,” said Agnes, smiling.

“How do you know?” asked Rickie.

“He’d scarcely be so frivolous.”

“Do you remember seeing him?”

“For a moment.”

What a memory she had! And how splendidly during that moment she had
behaved!

“Isn’t he marvellously clever?”

“I believe so.”

“Oh, give me clever people!” cried Mrs. Lewin. “They are kindness itself
at the Hall, but I assure you I am depressed at times. One cannot talk
bump-rowing for ever.”

“I never hear about him, Rickie; but isn’t he really your greatest
friend?”

“I don’t go in for greatest friends.”

“Do you mean you like us all equally?”

“All differently, those of you I like.”

“Ah, you’ve caught it!” cried Mrs. Lewin. “Mr. Elliot gave it you there
well.”

Agnes laughed, and, her elbows on the table, regarded them both through
her fingers--a habit of hers. Then she said, “Can’t we see the great Mr.
Ansell?”

“Oh, let’s. Or would he frighten me?”

“He would frighten you,” said Rickie. “He’s a trifle weird.”

“My good Rickie, if you knew the deathly dullness of Sawston--every
one saying the proper thing at the proper time, I so proper, Herbert
so proper! Why, weirdness is the one thing I long for! Do arrange
something.”

“I’m afraid there’s no opportunity. Ansell goes some vast bicycle ride
this afternoon; this evening you’re tied up at the Hall; and tomorrow
you go.”

“But there’s breakfast tomorrow,” said Agnes. “Look here, Rickie, bring
Mr. Ansell to breakfast with us at Buoys.”

Mrs. Lewin seconded the invitation.

“Bad luck again,” said Rickie boldly; “I’m already fixed up for
breakfast. I’ll tell him of your very kind intention.”

“Let’s have him alone,” murmured Agnes.

“My dear girl, I should die through the floor! Oh, it’ll be all right
about breakfast. I rather think we shall get asked this evening by that
shy man who has the pretty rooms in Trinity.”

“Oh, very well. Where is it you breakfast, Rickie?”

He faltered. “To Ansell’s, it is--” It seemed as if he was making some
great admission. So self-conscious was he, that he thought the two women
exchanged glances. Had Agnes already explored that part of him that did
not belong to her? Would another chance step reveal the part that did?
He asked them abruptly what they would like to do after lunch.

“Anything,” said Mrs. Lewin,--“anything in the world.”

A walk? A boat? Ely? A drive? Some objection was raised to each. “To
tell the truth,” she said at last, “I do feel a wee bit tired, and what
occurs to me is this. You and Agnes shall leave me here and have no more
bother. I shall be perfectly happy snoozling in one of these delightful
drawing-room chairs. Do what you like, and then pick me up after it.”

“Alas, it’s against regulations,” said Rickie. “The Union won’t trust
lady visitors on its premises alone.”

“But who’s to know I’m alone? With a lot of men in the drawing-room,
how’s each to know that I’m not with the others?”

“That would shock Rickie,” said Agnes, laughing. “He’s frightfully
high-principled.”

“No, I’m not,” said Rickie, thinking of his recent shiftiness over
breakfast.

“Then come for a walk with me. I want exercise. Some connection of ours
was once rector of Madingley. I shall walk out and see the church.”

Mrs. Lewin was accordingly left in the Union.

“This is jolly!” Agnes exclaimed as she strode along the somewhat
depressing road that leads out of Cambridge past the observatory. “Do I
go too fast?”

“No, thank you. I get stronger every year. If it wasn’t for the look of
the thing, I should be quite happy.”

“But you don’t care for the look of the thing. It’s only ignorant people
who do that, surely.”

“Perhaps. I care. I like people who are well-made and beautiful. They
are of some use in the world. I understand why they are there. I cannot
understand why the ugly and crippled are there, however healthy they
may feel inside. Don’t you know how Turner spoils his pictures by
introducing a man like a bolster in the foreground? Well, in actual life
every landscape is spoilt by men of worse shapes still.”

“You sound like a bolster with the stuffing out.” They laughed. She
always blew his cobwebs away like this, with a puff of humorous mountain
air. Just now the associations he attached to her were various--she
reminded him of a heroine of Meredith’s--but a heroine at the end of the
book. All had been written about her. She had played her mighty part,
and knew that it was over. He and he alone was not content, and wrote
for her daily a trivial and impossible sequel.

Last time they had talked about Gerald. But that was some six months
ago, when things felt easier. Today Gerald was the faintest blur.
Fortunately the conversation turned to Mr. Pembroke and to education.
Did women lose a lot by not knowing Greek? “A heap,” said Rickie,
roughly. But modern languages? Thus they got to Germany, which he had
visited last Easter with Ansell; and thence to the German Emperor, and
what a to-do he made; and from him to our own king (still Prince of
Wales), who had lived while an undergraduate at Madingley Hall. Here it
was. And all the time he thought, “It is hard on her. She has no right
to be walking with me. She would be ill with disgust if she knew. It is
hard on her to be loved.”

They looked at the Hall, and went inside the pretty little church. Some
Arundel prints hung upon the pillars, and Agnes expressed the opinion
that pictures inside a place of worship were a pity. Rickie did not
agree with this. He said again that nothing beautiful was ever to be
regretted.

“You’re cracked on beauty,” she whispered--they were still inside the
church. “Do hurry up and write something.”

“Something beautiful?”

“I believe you can. I’m going to lecture you seriously all the way home.
Take care that you don’t waste your life.”

They continued the conversation outside. “But I’ve got to hate my own
writing. I believe that most people come to that stage--not so early
though. What I write is too silly. It can’t happen. For instance, a
stupid vulgar man is engaged to a lovely young lady. He wants her to
live in the towns, but she only cares for woods. She shocks him this way
and that, but gradually he tames her, and makes her nearly as dull as
he is. One day she has a last explosion--over the snobby wedding
presents--and flies out of the drawing-room window, shouting, ‘Freedom
and truth!’ Near the house is a little dell full of fir-trees, and she
runs into it. He comes there the next moment. But she’s gone.”

“Awfully exciting. Where?”

“Oh Lord, she’s a Dryad!” cried Rickie, in great disgust. “She’s turned
into a tree.”

“Rickie, it’s very good indeed. The kind of thing has something in it.
Of course you get it all through Greek and Latin. How upset the man must
be when he sees the girl turn.”

“He doesn’t see her. He never guesses. Such a man could never see a
Dryad.”

“So you describe how she turns just before he comes up?”

“No. Indeed I don’t ever say that she does turn. I don’t use the word
‘Dryad’ once.”

“I think you ought to put that part plainly. Otherwise, with such an
original story, people might miss the point. Have you had any luck with
it?”

“Magazines? I haven’t tried. I know what the stuff’s worth. You see, a
year or two ago I had a great idea of getting into touch with Nature,
just as the Greeks were in touch; and seeing England so beautiful, I
used to pretend that her trees and coppices and summer fields of parsley
were alive. It’s funny enough now, but it wasn’t funny then, for I got
in such a state that I believed, actually believed, that Fauns lived in
a certain double hedgerow near the Cog Magogs, and one evening I walked
a mile sooner than go through it alone.”

“Good gracious!” She laid her hand on his shoulder.

He moved to the other side of the road. “It’s all right now. I’ve
changed those follies for others. But while I had them I began to write,
and even now I keep on writing, though I know better. I’ve got quite a
pile of little stories, all harping on this ridiculous idea of getting
into touch with Nature.”

“I wish you weren’t so modest. It’s simply splendid as an idea.
Though--but tell me about the Dryad who was engaged to be married. What
was she like?”

“I can show you the dell in which the young person disappeared. We pass
it on the right in a moment.”

“It does seem a pity that you don’t make something of your talents. It
seems such a waste to write little stories and never publish them. You
must have enough for a book. Life is so full in our days that short
stories are the very thing; they get read by people who’d never tackle a
novel. For example, at our Dorcas we tried to read out a long affair
by Henry James--Herbert saw it recommended in ‘The Times.’ There was no
doubt it was very good, but one simply couldn’t remember from one week
to another what had happened. So now our aim is to get something that
just lasts the hour. I take you seriously, Rickie, and that is why I am
so offensive. You are too modest. People who think they can do nothing
so often do nothing. I want you to plunge.”

It thrilled him like a trumpet-blast. She took him seriously. Could he
but thank her for her divine affability! But the words would stick in
his throat, or worse still would bring other words along with them. His
breath came quickly, for he seldom spoke of his writing, and no one, not
even Ansell, had advised him to plunge.

“But do you really think that I could take up literature?”

“Why not? You can try. Even if you fail, you can try. Of course we think
you tremendously clever; and I met one of your dons at tea, and he said
that your degree was not in the least a proof of your abilities: he said
that you knocked up and got flurried in examinations. Oh!”--her cheek
flushed,--“I wish I was a man. The whole world lies before them. They
can do anything. They aren’t cooped up with servants and tea parties and
twaddle. But where’s this dell where the Dryad disappeared?”

“We’ve passed it.” He had meant to pass it. It was too beautiful. All
he had read, all he had hoped for, all he had loved, seemed to quiver
in its enchanted air. It was perilous. He dared not enter it with such a
woman.

“How long ago?” She turned back. “I don’t want to miss the dell. Here
it must be,” she added after a few moments, and sprang up the green bank
that hid the entrance from the road. “Oh, what a jolly place!”

“Go right in if you want to see it,” said Rickie, and did not offer to
go with her. She stood for a moment looking at the view, for a few steps
will increase a view in Cambridgeshire. The wind blew her dress against
her. Then, like a cataract again, she vanished pure and cool into the
dell.

The young man thought of her feelings no longer. His heart throbbed
louder and louder, and seemed to shake him to pieces. “Rickie!”

She was calling from the dell. For an answer he sat down where he was,
on the dust-bespattered margin. She could call as loud as she liked. The
devil had done much, but he should not take him to her.

“Rickie!”--and it came with the tones of an angel. He drove his fingers
into his ears, and invoked the name of Gerald. But there was no sign,
neither angry motion in the air nor hint of January mist. June--fields
of June, sky of June, songs of June. Grass of June beneath him, grass of
June over the tragedy he had deemed immortal. A bird called out of the
dell: “Rickie!”

A bird flew into the dell.

“Did you take me for the Dryad?” she asked. She was sitting down with
his head on her lap. He had laid it there for a moment before he went
out to die, and she had not let him take it away.

“I prayed you might not be a woman,” he whispered.

“Darling, I am very much a woman. I do not vanish into groves and trees.
I thought you would never come.”

“Did you expect--?”

“I hoped. I called hoping.”

Inside the dell it was neither June nor January. The chalk walls barred
out the seasons, and the fir-trees did not seem to feel their passage.
Only from time to time the odours of summer slipped in from the wood
above, to comment on the waxing year. She bent down to touch him with
her lips.

He started, and cried passionately, “Never forget that your greatest
thing is over. I have forgotten: I am too weak. You shall never forget.
What I said to you then is greater than what I say to you now. What he
gave you then is greater than anything you will get from me.”

She was frightened. Again she had the sense of something abnormal. Then
she said, “What is all this nonsense?” and folded him in her arms.



VIII

Ansell stood looking at his breakfast-table, which was laid for four
instead of two. His bedmaker, equally peevish, explained how it had
happened. Last night, at one in the morning, the porter had been awoke
with a note for the kitchens, and in that note Mr. Elliot said that all
these things were to be sent to Mr. Ansell’s.

“The fools have sent the original order as well. Here’s the lemon-sole
for two. I can’t move for food.”

“The note being ambiguous, the Kitchens judged best to send it all.”
 She spoke of the kitchens in a half-respectful, half-pitying way, much
as one speaks of Parliament.

“Who’s to pay for it?” He peeped into the new dishes. Kidneys entombed
in an omelette, hot roast chicken in watery gravy, a glazed but pallid
pie.

“And who’s to wash it up?” said the bedmaker to her help outside.

Ansell had disputed late last night concerning Schopenhauer, and was a
little cross and tired. He bounced over to Tilliard, who kept opposite.
Tilliard was eating gooseberry jam.

“Did Elliot ask you to breakfast with me?”

“No,” said Tilliard mildly.

“Well, you’d better come, and bring every one you know.”

So Tilliard came, bearing himself a little formally, for he was not
very intimate with his neighbour. Out of the window they called to
Widdrington. But he laid his hand on his stomach, thus indicating it was
too late.

“Who’s to pay for it?” repeated Ansell, as a man appeared from the
Buttery carrying coffee on a bright tin tray.

“College coffee! How nice!” remarked Tilliard, who was cutting the pie.
“But before term ends you must come and try my new machine. My sister
gave it me. There is a bulb at the top, and as the water boils--”

“He might have counter-ordered the lemon-sole. That’s Rickie all over.
Violently economical, and then loses his head, and all the things go
bad.”

“Give them to the bedder while they’re hot.” This was done. She accepted
them dispassionately, with the air of one who lives without nourishment.
Tilliard continued to describe his sister’s coffee machine.

“What’s that?” They could hear panting and rustling on the stairs.

“It sounds like a lady,” said Tilliard fearfully. He slipped the piece
of pie back. It fell into position like a brick.

“Is it here? Am I right? Is it here?” The door opened and in came Mrs.
Lewin. “Oh horrors! I’ve made a mistake.”

“That’s all right,” said Ansell awkwardly.

“I wanted Mr. Elliot. Where are they?”

“We expect Mr. Elliot every-moment,” said Tilliard.

“Don’t tell me I’m right,” cried Mrs. Lewin, “and that you’re the
terrifying Mr. Ansell.” And, with obvious relief, she wrung Tilliard
warmly by the hand.

“I’m Ansell,” said Ansell, looking very uncouth and grim.

“How stupid of me not to know it,” she gasped, and would have gone on to
I know not what, but the door opened again. It was Rickie.

“Here’s Miss Pembroke,” he said. “I am going to marry her.”

There was a profound silence.

“We oughtn’t to have done things like this,” said Agnes, turning to Mrs.
Lewin. “We have no right to take Mr. Ansell by surprise. It is Rickie’s
fault. He was that obstinate. He would bring us. He ought to be
horsewhipped.”

“He ought, indeed,” said Tilliard pleasantly, and bolted. Not till he
gained his room did he realize that he had been less apt than usual. As
for Ansell, the first thing he said was, “Why didn’t you counter-order
the lemon-sole?”

In such a situation Mrs. Lewin was of priceless value. She led the way
to the table, observing, “I quite agree with Miss Pembroke. I loathe
surprises. Never shall I forget my horror when the knife-boy painted the
dove’s cage with the dove inside. He did it as a surprise. Poor Parsival
nearly died. His feathers were bright green!”

“Well, give me the lemon-soles,” said Rickie. “I like them.”

“The bedder’s got them.”

“Well, there you are! What’s there to be annoyed about?”

“And while the cage was drying we put him among the bantams. They had
been the greatest allies. But I suppose they took him for a parrot or a
hawk, or something that bantams hate for while his cage was drying they
picked out his feathers, and PICKED and PICKED out his feathers, till he
was perfectly bald. ‘Hugo, look,’ said I. ‘This is the end of Parsival.
Let me have no more surprises.’ He burst into tears.”

Thus did Mrs. Lewin create an atmosphere. At first it seemed unreal,
but gradually they got used to it, and breathed scarcely anything else
throughout the meal. In such an atmosphere everything seemed of small
and equal value, and the engagement of Rickie and Agnes like the
feathers of Parsival, fluttered lightly to the ground. Ansell was
generally silent. He was no match for these two quite clever women. Only
once was there a hitch.

They had been talking gaily enough about the betrothal when Ansell
suddenly interrupted with, “When is the marriage?”

“Mr. Ansell,” said Agnes, blushing, “I wish you hadn’t asked that. That
part’s dreadful. Not for years, as far as we can see.”

But Rickie had not seen as far. He had not talked to her of this at
all. Last night they had spoken only of love. He exclaimed, “Oh,
Agnes-don’t!” Mrs. Lewin laughed roguishly.

“Why this delay?” asked Ansell.

Agnes looked at Rickie, who replied, “I must get money, worse luck.”

“I thought you’d got money.”

He hesitated, and then said, “I must get my foot on the ladder, then.”

Ansell began with, “On which ladder?” but Mrs. Lewin, using the
privilege of her sex, exclaimed, “Not another word. If there’s a thing I
abominate, it is plans. My head goes whirling at once.” What she really
abominated was questions, and she saw that Ansell was turning serious.
To appease him, she put on her clever manner and asked him about
Germany. How had it impressed him? Were we so totally unfitted to
repel invasion? Was not German scholarship overestimated? He replied
discourteously, but he did reply; and if she could have stopped him
thinking, her triumph would have been complete.

When they rose to go, Agnes held Ansell’s hand for a moment in her own.

“Good-bye,” she said. “It was very unconventional of us to come as we
did, but I don’t think any of us are conventional people.”

He only replied, “Good-bye.” The ladies started off. Rickie lingered
behind to whisper, “I would have it so. I would have you begin square
together. I can’t talk yet--I’ve loved her for years--can’t think what
she’s done it for. I’m going to write short stories. I shall start this
afternoon. She declares there may be something in me.”

As soon as he had left, Tilliard burst in, white with agitation, and
crying, “Did you see my awful faux pas--about the horsewhip? What shall
I do? I must call on Elliot. Or had I better write?”

“Miss Pembroke will not mind,” said Ansell gravely. “She is
unconventional.” He knelt in an arm-chair and hid his face in the back.

“It was like a bomb,” said Tilliard.

“It was meant to be.”

“I do feel a fool. What must she think?”

“Never mind, Tilliard. You’ve not been as big a fool as myself. At all
events, you told her he must be horsewhipped.”

Tilliard hummed a little tune. He hated anything nasty, and there was
nastiness in Ansell. “What did you tell her?” he asked.

“Nothing.”

“What do you think of it?”

“I think: Damn those women.”

“Ah, yes. One hates one’s friends to get engaged. It makes one feel so
old: I think that is one of the reasons. The brother just above me has
lately married, and my sister was quite sick about it, though the thing
was suitable in every way.”

“Damn THESE women, then,” said Ansell, bouncing round in the chair.
“Damn these particular women.”

“They looked and spoke like ladies.”

“Exactly. Their diplomacy was ladylike. Their lies were ladylike.
They’ve caught Elliot in a most ladylike way. I saw it all during the
one moment we were natural. Generally we were clattering after the
married one, whom--like a fool--I took for a fool. But for one moment we
were natural, and during that moment Miss Pembroke told a lie, and made
Rickie believe it was the truth.”

“What did she say?”

“She said `we see’ instead of ‘I see.’”

Tilliard burst into laughter. This jaundiced young philosopher, with his
kinky view of life, was too much for him.

“She said ‘we see,’” repeated Ansell, “instead of ‘I see,’ and she made
him believe that it was the truth. She caught him and makes him believe
that he caught her. She came to see me and makes him think that it is
his idea. That is what I mean when I say that she is a lady.”

“You are too subtle for me. My dull eyes could only see two happy
people.”

“I never said they weren’t happy.”

“Then, my dear Ansell, why are you so cut up? It’s beastly when a friend
marries,--and I grant he’s rather young,--but I should say it’s the best
thing for him. A decent woman--and you have proved not one thing against
her--a decent woman will keep him up to the mark and stop him getting
slack. She’ll make him responsible and manly, for much as I like Rickie,
I always find him a little effeminate. And, really,”--his voice grew
sharper, for he was irritated by Ansell’s conceit, “and, really, you
talk as if you were mixed up in the affair. They pay a civil visit to
your rooms, and you see nothing but dark plots and challenges to war.”

“War!” cried Ansell, crashing his fists together. “It’s war, then!”

“Oh, what a lot of tommy-rot,” said Tilliard. “Can’t a man and woman get
engaged? My dear boy--excuse me talking like this--what on earth is it
to do with us?”

“We’re his friends, and I hope we always shall be, but we shan’t keep
his friendship by fighting. We’re bound to fall into the background.
Wife first, friends some way after. You may resent the order, but it is
ordained by nature.”

“The point is, not what’s ordained by nature or any other fool, but
what’s right.”

“You are hopelessly unpractical,” said Tilliard, turning away. “And let
me remind you that you’ve already given away your case by acknowledging
that they’re happy.”

“She is happy because she has conquered; he is happy because he has
at last hung all the world’s beauty on to a single peg. He was always
trying to do it. He used to call the peg humanity. Will either of these
happinesses last? His can’t. Hers only for a time. I fight this woman
not only because she fights me, but because I foresee the most appalling
catastrophe. She wants Rickie, partly to replace another man whom she
lost two years ago, partly to make something out of him. He is to write.
In time she will get sick of this. He won’t get famous. She will only
see how thin he is and how lame. She will long for a jollier husband,
and I don’t blame her. And, having made him thoroughly miserable and
degraded, she will bolt--if she can do it like a lady.”

Such were the opinions of Stewart Ansell.



IX

Seven letters written in June:--


Cambridge

Dear Rickie,

I would rather write, and you can guess what kind of letter this is
when I say it is a fair copy: I have been making rough drafts all
the morning. When I talk I get angry, and also at times try to be
clever--two reasons why I fail to get attention paid to me. This is a
letter of the prudent sort. If it makes you break off the engagement,
its work is done. You are not a person who ought to marry at all. You
are unfitted in body: that we once discussed. You are also unfitted in
soul: you want and you need to like many people, and a man of that sort
ought not to marry. “You never were attached to that great sect” who
can like one person only, and if you try to enter it you will find
destruction. I have read in books and I cannot afford to despise books,
they are all that I have to go by--that men and women desire different
things. Man wants to love mankind; woman wants to love one man. When she
has him her work is over. She is the emissary of Nature, and Nature’s
bidding has been fulfilled. But man does not care a damn for Nature--or
at least only a very little damn. He cares for a hundred things besides,
and the more civilized he is the more he will care for these other
hundred things, and demand not only--a wife and children, but also
friends, and work, and spiritual freedom.

I believe you to be extraordinarily civilized.--Yours ever,

S.A.


Shelthorpe, 9 Sawston Park Road, Sawston

Dear Ansell,

But I’m in love--a detail you’ve forgotten. I can’t listen to English
Essays. The wretched Agnes may be an “emissary of Nature,” but I only
grinned when I read it. I may be extraordinarily civilized, but I don’t
feel so; I’m in love, and I’ve found a woman to love me, and I mean
to have the hundred other things as well. She wants me to have
them--friends and work, and spiritual freedom, and everything. You
and your books miss this, because your books are too sedate. Read
poetry--not only Shelley. Understand Beatrice, and Clara Middleton, and
Brunhilde in the first scene of Gotterdammerung. Understand Goethe when
he says “the eternal feminine leads us on,” and don’t write another
English Essay.--Yours ever affectionately,

R.E.


Cambridge

Dear Rickie:

What am I to say? “Understand Xanthippe, and Mrs. Bennet, and Elsa in
the question scene of Lohengrin”? “Understand Euripides when he says the
eternal feminine leads us a pretty dance”? I shall say nothing of the
sort. The allusions in this English Essay shall not be literary. My
personal objections to Miss Pembroke are as follows:--(1) She is not
serious. (2) She is not truthful.


Shelthorpe, 9 Sawston Park Road Sawston

My Dear Stewart,

You couldn’t know. I didn’t know for a moment. But this letter of yours
is the most wonderful thing that has ever happened to me yet--more
wonderful (I don’t exaggerate) than the moment when Agnes promised to
marry me. I always knew you liked me, but I never knew how much until
this letter. Up to now I think we have been too much like the strong
heroes in books who feel so much and say so little, and feel all the
more for saying so little. Now that’s over and we shall never be that
kind of an ass again. We’ve hit--by accident--upon something permanent.
You’ve written to me, “I hate the woman who will be your wife,” and
I write back, “Hate her. Can’t I love you both?” She will never come
between us, Stewart (She wouldn’t wish to, but that’s by the way),
because our friendship has now passed beyond intervention. No third
person could break it. We couldn’t ourselves, I fancy. We may quarrel
and argue till one of us dies, but the thing is registered. I only wish,
dear man, you could be happier. For me, it’s as if a light was suddenly
held behind the world.

R.E.


Shelthorpe, 9 Sawston Park Road, Sawston

Dear Mrs. Lewin,--

The time goes flying, but I am getting to learn my wonderful boy. We
speak a great deal about his work. He has just finished a curious thing
called “Nemi”--about a Roman ship that is actually sunk in some lake. I
cannot think how he describes the things, when he has never seen them.
If, as I hope, he goes to Italy next year, he should turn out something
really good. Meanwhile we are hunting for a publisher. Herbert believes
that a collection of short stories is hard to get published. It is,
after all, better to write one long one.

But you must not think we only talk books. What we say on other topics
cannot so easily be repeated! Oh, Mrs Lewin, he is a dear, and dearer
than ever now that we have him at Sawston. Herbert, in a quiet way,
has been making inquiries about those Cambridge friends of his. Nothing
against them, but they seem to be terribly eccentric. None of them
are good at games, and they spend all their spare time thinking and
discussing. They discuss what one knows and what one never will know and
what one had much better not know. Herbert says it is because they have
not got enough to do.--Ever your grateful and affectionate friend,

Agnes Pembroke


Shelthorpe, 9 Sawston Park Road Sawston

Dear Mr. Silt,--

Thank you for the congratulations, which I have handed over to the
delighted Rickie.

(The congratulations were really addressed to Agnes--a social blunder
which Mr. Pembroke deftly corrects.)

I am sorry that the rumor reached you that I was not pleased. Anything
pleases me that promises my sister’s happiness, and I have known your
cousin nearly as long as you have. It will be a very long engagement,
for he must make his way first. The dear boy is not nearly as wealthy as
he supposed; having no tastes, and hardly any expenses, he used to talk
as if he were a millionaire. He must at least double his income before
he can dream of more intimate ties. This has been a bitter pill, but I
am glad to say that they have accepted it bravely.

Hoping that you and Mrs. Silt will profit by your week at Margate.-I
remain, yours very sincerely,

Herbert Pembroke


Cadover, Wilts.

Dear Miss Pembroke,--Agnes--

I hear that you are going to marry my nephew. I have no idea what he is
like, and wonder whether you would bring him that I may find out. Isn’t
September rather a nice month? You might have to go to Stone Henge, but
with that exception would be left unmolested. I do hope you will manage
the visit. We met once at Mrs. Lewin’s, and I have a very clear
recollection of you.--Believe me, yours sincerely,

Emily Failing



X

The rain tilted a little from the south-west. For the most part it fell
from a grey cloud silently, but now and then the tilt increased, and
a kind of sigh passed over the country as the drops lashed the walls,
trees, shepherds, and other motionless objects that stood in their
slanting career. At times the cloud would descend and visibly embrace
the earth, to which it had only sent messages; and the earth itself
would bring forth clouds--clouds of a whiter breed--which formed in
shallow valleys and followed the courses of the streams. It seemed the
beginning of life. Again God said, “Shall we divide the waters from the
land or not? Was not the firmament labour and glory sufficient?” At all
events it was the beginning of life pastoral, behind which imagination
cannot travel.

Yet complicated people were getting wet--not only the shepherds. For
instance, the piano-tuner was sopping. So was the vicar’s wife. So were
the lieutenant and the peevish damsels in his Battleston car. Gallantry,
charity, and art pursued their various missions, perspiring and muddy,
while out on the slopes beyond them stood the eternal man and the
eternal dog, guarding eternal sheep until the world is vegetarian.

Inside an arbour--which faced east, and thus avoided the bad
weather--there sat a complicated person who was dry. She looked at the
drenched world with a pleased expression, and would smile when a cloud
would lay down on the village, or when the rain sighed louder than usual
against her solid shelter. Ink, paperclips, and foolscap paper were
on the table before her, and she could also reach an umbrella, a
waterproof, a walking-stick, and an electric bell. Her age was between
elderly and old, and her forehead was wrinkled with an expression of
slight but perpetual pain. But the lines round her mouth indicated that
she had laughed a great deal during her life, just as the clean tight
skin round her eyes perhaps indicated that she had not often cried. She
was dressed in brown silk. A brown silk shawl lay most becomingly over
her beautiful hair.

After long thought she wrote on the paper in front of her, “The subject
of this memoir first saw the light at Wolverhampton on May the 14th,
1842.” She laid down her pen and said “Ugh!” A robin hopped in and she
welcomed him. A sparrow followed and she stamped her foot. She watched
some thick white water which was sliding like a snake down the gutter
of the gravel path. It had just appeared. It must have escaped from a
hollow in the chalk up behind. The earth could absorb no longer. The
lady did not think of all this, for she hated questions of whence and
wherefore, and the ways of the earth (“our dull stepmother”) bored her
unspeakably. But the water, just the snake of water, was amusing, and
she flung her golosh at it to dam it up. Then she wrote feverishly, “The
subject of this memoir first saw the light in the middle of the night.
It was twenty to eleven. His pa was a parson, but he was not his pa’s
son, and never went to heaven.” There was the sound of a train, and
presently white smoke appeared, rising laboriously through the heavy
air. It distracted her, and for about a quarter of an hour she sat
perfectly still, doing nothing. At last she pushed the spoilt paper
aside, took afresh piece, and was beginning to write, “On May the 14th,
1842,” when there was a crunch on the gravel, and a furious voice said,
“I am sorry for Flea Thompson.”

“I daresay I am sorry for him too,” said the lady; her voice was languid
and pleasant. “Who is he?”

“Flea’s a liar, and the next time we meet he’ll be a football.” Off
slipped a sodden ulster. He hung it up angrily upon a peg: the arbour
provided several.

“But who is he, and why has he that disastrous name?”

“Flea? Fleance. All the Thompsons are named out of Shakespeare. He
grazes the Rings.”

“Ah, I see. A pet lamb.”

“Lamb! Shepherd!”

“One of my Shepherds?”

“The last time I go with his sheep. But not the last time he sees me. I
am sorry for him. He dodged me today.”

“Do you mean to say”--she became animated--“that you have been out in
the wet keeping the sheep of Flea Thompson?”

“I had to.” He blew on his fingers and took off his cap. Water trickled
over his unshaven cheeks. His hair was so wet that it seemed worked upon
his scalp in bronze.

“Get away, bad dog!” screamed the lady, for he had given himself a shake
and spattered her dress with water. He was a powerful boy of twenty,
admirably muscular, but rather too broad for his height. People called
him “Podge” until they were dissuaded. Then they called him “Stephen” or
“Mr. Wonham.” Then he said, “You can call me Podge if you like.”

“As for Flea--!” he began tempestuously. He sat down by her, and with
much heavy breathing told the story,--“Flea has a girl at Wintersbridge,
and I had to go with his sheep while he went to see her. Two hours. We
agreed. Half an hour to go, an hour to kiss his girl, and half an hour
back--and he had my bike. Four hours! Four hours and seven minutes I was
on the Rings, with a fool of a dog, and sheep doing all they knew to get
the turnips.”

“My farm is a mystery to me,” said the lady, stroking her fingers.

“Some day you must really take me to see it. It must be like a Gilbert
and Sullivan opera, with a chorus of agitated employers. How is it that
I have escaped? Why have I never been summoned to milk the cows, or flay
the pigs, or drive the young bullocks to the pasture?”

He looked at her with astonishingly blue eyes--the only dry things he
had about him. He could not see into her: she would have puzzled an
older and clever man. He may have seen round her.

“A thing of beauty you are not. But I sometimes think you are a joy for
ever.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Oh, you understand right enough,” she exclaimed irritably, and then
smiled, for he was conceited, and did not like being told that he was
not a thing of beauty. “Large and steady feet,” she continued, “have
this disadvantage--you can knock down a man, but you will never knock
down a woman.”

“I don’t know what you mean. I’m not likely--”

“Oh, never mind--never, never mind. I was being funny. I repent. Tell me
about the sheep. Why did you go with them?”

“I did tell you. I had to.”

“But why?”

“He had to see his girl.”

“But why?”

His eyes shot past her again. It was so obvious that the man had to see
his girl. For two hours though--not for four hours seven minutes.

“Did you have any lunch?”

“I don’t hold with regular meals.”

“Did you have a book?”

“I don’t hold with books in the open. None of the older men read.”

“Did you commune with yourself, or don’t you hold with that?”

“Oh Lord, don’t ask me!”

“You distress me. You rob the Pastoral of its lingering romance. Is
there no poetry and no thought in England? Is there no one, in all these
downs, who warbles with eager thought the Doric lay?”

“Chaps sing to themselves at times, if you mean that.”

“I dream of Arcady. I open my eyes. Wiltshire. Of Amaryllis: Flea
Thompson’s girl. Of the pensive shepherd, twitching his mantle blue: you
in an ulster. Aren’t you sorry for me?”

“May I put in a pipe?”

“By all means put a pipe in. In return, tell me of what you were
thinking for the four hours and the seven minutes.”

He laughed shyly. “You do ask a man such questions.”

“Did you simply waste the time?”

“I suppose so.”

“I thought that Colonel Robert Ingersoll says you must be strenuous.”

At the sound of this name he whisked open a little cupboard, and
declaring, “I haven’t a moment to spare,” took out of it a pile of
“Clarion” and other reprints, adorned as to their covers with bald or
bearded apostles of humanity. Selecting a bald one, he began at once
to read, occasionally exclaiming, “That’s got them,” “That’s knocked
Genesis,” with similar ejaculations of an aspiring mind. She glanced
at the pile. Reran, minus the style. Darwin, minus the modesty. A
comic edition of the book of Job, by “Excelsior,” Pittsburgh, Pa. “The
Beginning of Life,” with diagrams. “Angel or Ape?” by Mrs. Julia P.
Chunk. She was amused, and wondered idly what was passing within his
narrow but not uninteresting brain. Did he suppose that he was going to
“find out”? She had tried once herself, but had since subsided into a
sprightly orthodoxy. Why didn’t he read poetry, instead of wasting his
time between books like these and country like that?

The cloud parted, and the increase of light made her look up. Over the
valley she saw a grave sullen down, and on its flanks a little brown
smudge--her sheep, together with her shepherd, Fleance Thompson,
returned to his duties at last. A trickle of water came through the
arbour roof. She shrieked in dismay.

“That’s all right,” said her companion, moving her chair, but still
keeping his place in his book.

She dried up the spot on the manuscript. Then she wrote: “Anthony
Eustace Failing, the subject of this memoir, was born at Wolverhampton.”
 But she wrote no more. She was fidgety. Another drop fell from the roof.
Likewise an earwig. She wished she had not been so playful in flinging
her golosh into the path. The boy who was overthrowing religion breathed
somewhat heavily as he did so. Another earwig. She touched the electric
bell.

“I’m going in,” she observed. “It’s far too wet.” Again the cloud parted
and caused her to add, “Weren’t you rather kind to Flea?” But he was
deep in the book. He read like a poor person, with lips apart and a
finger that followed the print. At times he scratched his ear, or ran
his tongue along a straggling blonde moustache. His face had after all a
certain beauty: at all events the colouring was regal--a steady crimson
from throat to forehead: the sun and the winds had worked on him daily
ever since he was born. “The face of a strong man,” thought the lady.
“Let him thank his stars he isn’t a silent strong man, or I’d turn
him into the gutter.” Suddenly it struck her that he was like an Irish
terrier. He worried infinity as if it was a bone. Gnashing his teeth,
he tried to carry the eternal subtleties by violence. As a man he often
bored her, for he was always saying and doing the same things. But as
a philosopher he really was a joy for ever, an inexhaustible buffoon.
Taking up her pen, she began to caricature him. She drew a rabbit-warren
where rabbits were at play in four dimensions. Before she had introduced
the principal figure, she was interrupted by the footman. He had come up
from the house to answer the bell. On seeing her he uttered a respectful
cry.

“Madam! Are you here? I am very sorry. I looked for you everywhere. Mr.
Elliot and Miss Pembroke arrived nearly an hour ago.”

“Oh dear, oh dear!” exclaimed Mrs. Failing. “Take these papers. Where’s
the umbrella? Mr. Stephen will hold it over me. You hurry back and
apologize. Are they happy?”

“Miss Pembroke inquired after you, madam.”

“Have they had tea?”

“Yes, madam.”

“Leighton!”

“Yes, sir.”

“I believe you knew she was here all the time. You didn’t want to wet
your pretty skin.”

“You must not call me ‘she’ to the servants,” said Mrs. Failing as they
walked away, she limping with a stick, he holding a great umbrella over
her. “I will not have it.” Then more pleasantly, “And don’t tell him
he lies. We all lie. I knew quite well they were coming by the four-six
train. I saw it pass.”

“That reminds me. Another child run over at the Roman crossing.
Whish--bang--dead.”

“Oh my foot! Oh my foot, my foot!” said Mrs. Failing, and paused to take
breath.

“Bad?” he asked callously.

Leighton, with bowed head, passed them with the manuscript and
disappeared among the laurels. The twinge of pain, which had been
slight, passed away, and they proceeded, descending a green airless
corridor which opened into the gravel drive.

“Isn’t it odd,” said Mrs. Failing, “that the Greeks should be
enthusiastic about laurels--that Apollo should pursue any one who could
possibly turn into such a frightful plant? What do you make of Rickie?”

“Oh, I don’t know.”

“Shall I lend you his story to read?”

He made no reply.

“Don’t you think, Stephen, that a person in your precarious position
ought to be civil to my relatives?”

“Sorry, Mrs. Failing. I meant to be civil. I only hadn’t--anything to
say.”

She a laughed. “Are you a dear boy? I sometimes wonder; or are you a
brute?”

Again he had nothing to say. Then she laughed more mischievously, and
said--

“How can you be either, when you are a philosopher? Would you mind
telling me--I am so anxious to learn--what happens to people when they
die?”

“Don’t ask ME.” He knew by bitter experience that she was making fun of
him.

“Oh, but I do ask you. Those paper books of yours are so up-to-date.
For instance, what has happened to the child you say was killed on the
line?”

The rain increased. The drops pattered hard on the leaves, and outside
the corridor men and women were struggling, however stupidly, with the
facts of life. Inside it they wrangled. She teased the boy, and laughed
at his theories, and proved that no man can be an agnostic who has a
sense of humour. Suddenly she stopped, not through any skill of his, but
because she had remembered some words of Bacon: “The true atheist is he
whose hands are cauterized by holy things.” She thought of her distant
youth. The world was not so humorous then, but it had been more
important. For a moment she respected her companion, and determined to
vex him no more.

They left the shelter of the laurels, crossed the broad drive, and were
inside the house at last. She had got quite wet, for the weather would
not let her play the simple life with impunity. As for him, he seemed a
piece of the wet.

“Look here,” she cried, as he hurried up to his attic, “don’t shave!”

He was delighted with the permission.

“I have an idea that Miss Pembroke is of the type that pretends to be
unconventional and really isn’t. I want to see how she takes it. Don’t
shave.”

In the drawing-room she could hear the guests conversing in the subdued
tones of those who have not been welcomed. Having changed her dress and
glanced at the poems of Milton, she went to them, with uplifted hands of
apology and horror.

“But I must have tea,” she announced, when they had assured her that
they understood. “Otherwise I shall start by being cross. Agnes, stop
me. Give me tea.”

Agnes, looking pleased, moved to the table and served her hostess.
Rickie followed with a pagoda of sandwiches and little cakes.

“I feel twenty-seven years younger. Rickie, you are so like your father.
I feel it is twenty-seven years ago, and that he is bringing your mother
to see me for the first time. It is curious--almost terrible--to see
history repeating itself.”

The remark was not tactful.

“I remember that visit well,” she continued thoughtfully, “I suppose it
was a wonderful visit, though we none of us knew it at the time. We all
fell in love with your mother. I wish she would have fallen in love with
us. She couldn’t bear me, could she?”

“I never heard her say so, Aunt Emily.”

“No; she wouldn’t. I am sure your father said so, though. My dear boy,
don’t look so shocked. Your father and I hated each other. He said so,
I said so, I say so; say so too. Then we shall start fair.--Just a
cocoanut cake.--Agnes, don’t you agree that it’s always best to speak
out?”

“Oh, rather, Mrs. Failing. But I’m shockingly straightforward.”

“So am I,” said the lady. “I like to get down to the bedrock.--Hullo!
Slippers? Slippers in the drawingroom?”

A young man had come in silently. Agnes observed with a feeling of
regret that he had not shaved. Rickie, after a moment’s hesitation,
remembered who it was, and shook hands with him. “You’ve grown since I
saw you last.”

He showed his teeth amiably.

“How long was that?” asked Mrs. Failing.

“Three years, wasn’t it? Came over from the Ansells--friends.”

“How disgraceful, Rickie! Why don’t you come and see me oftener?”

He could not retort that she never asked him.

“Agnes will make you come. Oh, let me introduce Mr. Wonham--Miss
Pembroke.”

“I am deputy hostess,” said Agnes. “May I give you some tea?”

“Thank you, but I have had a little beer.”

“It is one of the shepherds,” said Mrs. Failing, in low tones.

Agnes smiled rather wildly. Mrs. Lewin had warned her that Cadover
was an extraordinary place, and that one must never be astonished at
anything. A shepherd in the drawing-room! No harm. Still one ought
to know whether it was a shepherd or not. At all events he was in
gentleman’s clothing. She was anxious not to start with a blunder, and
therefore did not talk to the young fellow, but tried to gather what he
was from the demeanour of Rickie.

“I am sure, Mrs. Failing, that you need not talk of ‘making’ people come
to Cadover. There will be no difficulty, I should say.”

“Thank you, my dear. Do you know who once said those exact words to me?”

“Who?”

“Rickie’s mother.”

“Did she really?”

“My sister-in-law was a dear. You will have heard Rickie’s praises, but
now you must hear mine. I never knew a woman who was so unselfish and
yet had such capacities for life.”

“Does one generally exclude the other?” asked Rickie.

“Unselfish people, as a rule, are deathly dull. They have no colour.
They think of other people because it is easier. They give money because
they are too stupid or too idle to spend it properly on themselves.
That was the beauty of your mother--she gave away, but she also spent on
herself, or tried to.”

The light faded out of the drawing-room, in spite of it being September
and only half-past six. From her low chair Agnes could see the trees by
the drive, black against a blackening sky. That drive was half a mile
long, and she was praising its gravelled surface when Rickie called in a
voice of alarm, “I say, when did our train arrive?”

“Four-six.”

“I said so.”

“It arrived at four-six on the time-table,” said Mr. Wonham. “I want to
know when it got to the station?”

“I tell you again it was punctual. I tell you I looked at my watch. I
can do no more.”

Agnes was amazed. Was Rickie mad? A minute ago and they were boring each
other over dogs. What had happened?

“Now, now! Quarrelling already?” asked Mrs. Failing.

The footman, bringing a lamp, lit up two angry faces.

“He says--”

“He says--”

“He says we ran over a child.”

“So you did. You ran over a child in the village at four-seven by my
watch. Your train was late. You couldn’t have got to the station till
four-ten.”

“I don’t believe it. We had passed the village by four-seven. Agnes,
hadn’t we passed the village? It must have been an express that ran over
the child.”

“Now is it likely”--he appealed to the practical world--“is it likely
that the company would run a stopping train and then an express three
minutes after it?”

“A child--” said Rickie. “I can’t believe that the train killed a
child.” He thought of their journey. They were alone in the carriage.
As the train slackened speed he had caught her for a moment in his arms.
The rain beat on the windows, but they were in heaven.

“You’ve got to believe it,” said the other, and proceeded to “rub it
in.” His healthy, irritable face drew close to Rickie’s. “Two children
were kicking and screaming on the Roman crossing. Your train, being
late, came down on them. One of them was pulled off the line, but the
other was caught. How will you get out of that?”

“And how will you get out of it?” cried Mrs. Failing, turning the tables
on him. “Where’s the child now? What has happened to its soul? You must
know, Agnes, that this young gentleman is a philosopher.”

“Oh, drop all that,” said Mr. Wonham, suddenly collapsing.

“Drop it? Where? On my nice carpet?”

“I hate philosophy,” remarked Agnes, trying to turn the subject, for she
saw that it made Rickie unhappy.

“So do I. But I daren’t say so before Stephen. He despises us women.”

“No, I don’t,” said the victim, swaying to and fro on the window-sill,
whither he had retreated.

“Yes, he does. He won’t even trouble to answer us. Stephen! Podge!
Answer me. What has happened to the child’s soul?”

He flung open the window and leant from them into the dusk. They heard
him mutter something about a bridge.

“What did I tell you? He won’t answer my question.”

The delightful moment was approaching when the boy would lose his
temper: she knew it by a certain tremor in his heels.

“There wants a bridge,” he exploded. “A bridge instead of all this
rotten talk and the level-crossing. It wouldn’t break you to build a
two-arch bridge. Then the child’s soul, as you call it--well, nothing
would have happened to the child at all.”

A gust of night air entered, accompanied by rain. The flowers in the
vases rustled, and the flame of the lamp shot up and smoked the glass.
Slightly irritated, she ordered him to close the window.



XI

Cadover was not a large house. But it is the largest house with which
this story has dealings, and must always be thought of with respect. It
was built about the year 1800, and favoured the architecture of ancient
Rome--chiefly by means of five lank pilasters, which stretched from the
top of it to the bottom. Between the pilasters was the glass front door,
to the right of them the drawing room windows, to the left of them the
windows of the dining-room, above them a triangular area, which the
better-class servants knew as a “pendiment,” and which had in its middle
a small round hole, according to the usage of Palladio. The classical
note was also sustained by eight grey steps which led from the building
down into the drive, and by an attempt at a formal garden on the
adjoining lawn. The lawn ended in a Ha-ha (“Ha! ha! who shall regard
it?”), and thence the bare land sloped down into the village. The main
garden (walled) was to the left as one faced the house, while to the
right was that laurel avenue, leading up to Mrs. Failing’s arbour.

It was a comfortable but not very attractive place, and, to a certain
type of mind, its situation was not attractive either. From the
distance it showed as a grey box, huddled against evergreens. There
was no mystery about it. You saw it for miles. Its hill had none of the
beetling romance of Devonshire, none of the subtle contours that prelude
a cottage in Kent, but profferred its burden crudely, on a huge bare
palm. “There’s Cadover,” visitors would say. “How small it still looks.
We shall be late for lunch.” And the view from the windows, though
extensive, would not have been accepted by the Royal Academy. A valley,
containing a stream, a road, a railway; over the valley fields of barley
and wurzel, divided by no pretty hedges, and passing into a great and
formless down--this was the outlook, desolate at all times, and almost
terrifying beneath a cloudy sky. The down was called “Cadbury Range”
 (“Cocoa Squares” if you were young and funny), because high upon
it--one cannot say “on the top,” there being scarcely any tops
in Wiltshire--because high upon it there stood a double circle of
entrenchments. A bank of grass enclosed a ring of turnips, which
enclosed a second bank of grass, which enclosed more turnips, and in
the middle of the pattern grew one small tree. British? Roman? Saxon?
Danish? The competent reader will decide. The Thompson family knew it
to be far older than the Franco-German war. It was the property of
Government. It was full of gold and dead soldiers who had fought with
the soldiers on Castle Rings and been beaten. The road to Londinium,
having forded the stream and crossed the valley road and the railway,
passed up by these entrenchments. The road to London lay half a mile to
the right of them.

To complete this survey one must mention the church and the farm, both
of which lay over the stream in Cadford. Between them they ruled the
village, one claiming the souls of the labourers, the other their
bodies. If a man desired other religion or other employment he must
leave. The church lay up by the railway, the farm was down by the water
meadows. The vicar, a gentle charitable man scarcely realized his power,
and never tried to abuse it. Mr. Wilbraham, the agent, was of another
mould. He knew his place, and kept others to theirs: all society seemed
spread before him like a map. The line between the county and the local,
the line between the labourer and the artisan--he knew them all, and
strengthened them with no uncertain touch. Everything with him was
graduated--carefully graduated civility towards his superior, towards
his inferiors carefully graduated incivility. So--for he was a
thoughtful person--so alone, declared he, could things be kept together.

Perhaps the Comic Muse, to whom so much is now attributed, had caused
his estate to be left to Mr. Failing. Mr. Failing was the author of some
brilliant books on socialism,--that was why his wife married him--and
for twenty-five years he reigned up at Cadover and tried to put his
theories into practice. He believed that things could be kept together
by accenting the similarities, not the differences of men. “We are all
much more alike than we confess,” was one of his favourite speeches. As
a speech it sounded very well, and his wife had applauded; but when it
resulted in hard work, evenings in the reading-rooms, mixed-parties, and
long unobtrusive talks with dull people, she got bored. In her piquant
way she declared that she was not going to love her husband, and
succeeded. He took it quietly, but his brilliancy decreased. His health
grew worse, and he knew that when he died there was no one to carry on
his work. He felt, besides, that he had done very little. Toil as he
would, he had not a practical mind, and could never dispense with Mr.
Wilbraham. For all his tact, he would often stretch out the hand of
brotherhood too soon, or withhold it when it would have been accepted.
Most people misunderstood him, or only understood him when he was dead.
In after years his reign became a golden age; but he counted a few
disciples in his life-time, a few young labourers and tenant farmers,
who swore tempestuously that he was not really a fool. This, he told
himself, was as much as he deserved.

Cadover was inherited by his widow. She tried to sell it; she tried to
let it; but she asked too much, and as it was neither a pretty place nor
fertile, it was left on her hands. With many a groan she settled down
to banishment. Wiltshire people, she declared, were the stupidest in
England. She told them so to their faces, which made them no brighter.
And their county was worthy of them: no distinction in it--no
style--simply land.

But her wrath passed, or remained only as a graceful fretfulness. She
made the house comfortable, and abandoned the farm to Mr. Wilbraham.
With a good deal of care she selected a small circle of acquaintances,
and had them to stop in the summer months. In the winter she would go to
town and frequent the salons of the literary. As her lameness increased
she moved about less, and at the time of her nephew’s visit seldom left
the place that had been forced upon her as a home. Just now she
was busy. A prominent politician had quoted her husband. The young
generation asked, “Who is this Mr. Failing?” and the publishers wrote,
“Now is the time.” She was collecting some essays and penning an
introductory memoir.

Rickie admired his aunt, but did not care for her. She reminded him too
much of his father. She had the same affliction, the same heartlessness,
the same habit of taking life with a laugh--as if life is a pill! He
also felt that she had neglected him. He would not have asked much: as
for “prospects,” they never entered his head, but she was his only near
relative, and a little kindness and hospitality during the lonely years
would have made incalculable difference. Now that he was happier and
could bring her Agnes, she had asked him to stop at once. The sun as it
rose next morning spoke to him of a new life. He too had a purpose and
a value in the world at last. Leaning out of the window, he gazed at the
earth washed clean and heard through the pure air the distant noises of
the farm.

But that day nothing was to remain divine but the weather. His aunt, for
reasons of her own, decreed that he should go for a ride with the Wonham
boy. They were to look at Old Sarum, proceed thence to Salisbury, lunch
there, see the sights, call on a certain canon for tea, and return to
Cadover in the evening. The arrangement suited no one. He did not want
to ride, but to be with Agnes; nor did Agnes want to be parted from him,
nor Stephen to go with him. But the clearer the wishes of her guests
became, the more determined was Mrs. Failing to disregard them. She
smoothed away every difficulty, she converted every objection into a
reason, and she ordered the horses for half-past nine.

“It is a bore,” he grumbled as he sat in their little private
sitting-room, breaking his finger-nails upon the coachman’s gaiters. “I
can’t ride. I shall fall off. We should have been so happy here. It’s
just like Aunt Emily. Can’t you imagine her saying afterwards, ‘Lovers
are absurd. I made a point of keeping them apart,’ and then everybody
laughing.”

With a pretty foretaste of the future, Agnes knelt before him and did
the gaiters up. “Who is this Mr. Wonham, by the bye?”

“I don’t know. Some connection of Mr. Failing’s, I think.”

“Does he live here?”

“He used to be at school or something. He seems to have grown into a
tiresome person.”

“I suppose that Mrs. Failing has adopted him.”

“I suppose so. I believe that she has been quite kind. I do hope she’ll
be kind to you this morning. I hate leaving you with her.”

“Why, you say she likes me.”

“Yes, but that wouldn’t prevent--you see she doesn’t mind what she says
or what she repeats if it amuses her. If she thought it really funny,
for instance, to break off our engagement, she’d try.”

“Dear boy, what a frightful remark! But it would be funnier for us to
see her trying. Whatever could she do?”

He kissed the hands that were still busy with the fastenings. “Nothing.
I can’t see one thing. We simply lie open to each other, you and I.
There isn’t one new corner in either of us that she could reveal.
It’s only that I always have in this house the most awful feeling of
insecurity.”

“Why?”

“If any one says or does a foolish thing it’s always here. All the
family breezes have started here. It’s a kind of focus for aimed and
aimless scandal. You know, when my father and mother had their special
quarrel, my aunt was mixed up in it,--I never knew how or how much--but
you may be sure she didn’t calm things down, unless she found things
more entertaining calm.”

“Rickie! Rickie!” cried the lady from the garden, “Your riding-master’s
impatient.”

“We really oughtn’t to talk of her like this here,” whispered Agnes.
“It’s a horrible habit.”

“The habit of the country, Agnes. Ugh, this gossip!” Suddenly he flung
his arms over her. “Dear--dear--let’s beware of I don’t know what--of
nothing at all perhaps.”

“Oh, buck up!” yelled the irritable Stephen. “Which am I to
shorten--left stirrup or right?”

“Left!” shouted Agnes.

“How many holes?”

They hurried down. On the way she said: “I’m glad of the warning. Now
I’m prepared. Your aunt will get nothing out of me.”

Her betrothed tried to mount with the wrong foot according to his
invariable custom. She also had to pick up his whip. At last they
started, the boy showing off pretty consistently, and she was left alone
with her hostess.

“Dido is quiet as a lamb,” said Mrs. Failing, “and Stephen is a good
fielder. What a blessing it is to have cleared out the men. What shall
you and I do this heavenly morning?”

“I’m game for anything.”

“Have you quite unpacked?”

“Yes.”

“Any letters to write?” No.

“Then let’s go to my arbour. No, we won’t. It gets the morning sun, and
it’ll be too hot today.” Already she regretted clearing out the men. On
such a morning she would have liked to drive, but her third animal had
gone lame. She feared, too, that Miss Pembroke was going to bore her.
However, they did go to the arbour. In languid tones she pointed out the
various objects of interest.

“There’s the Cad, which goes into the something, which goes into the
Avon. Cadbury Rings opposite, Cadchurch to the extreme left: you can’t
see it. You were there last night. It is famous for the drunken parson
and the railway-station. Then Cad Dauntsey. Then Cadford, that side of
the stream, connected with Cadover, this. Observe the fertility of the
Wiltshire mind.”

“A terrible lot of Cads,” said Agnes brightly.

Mrs. Failing divided her guests into those who made this joke and those
who did not. The latter class was very small.

“The vicar of Cadford--not the nice drunkard--declares the name is
really ‘Chadford,’ and he worried on till I put up a window to St. Chad
in our church. His Cambridge wife pronounces it ‘Hyadford.’ I could
smack them both. How do you like Podge? Ah! you jump; I meant you to.
How do you like Podge Wonham?”

“Very nice,” said Agnes, laughing.

“Nice! He is a hero.”

There was a long interval of silence. Each lady looked, without much
interest, at the view. Mrs. Failing’s attitude towards Nature was
severely aesthetic--an attitude more sterile than the severely
practical. She applied the test of beauty to shadow and odour and sound;
they never filled her with reverence or excitement; she never knew them
as a resistless trinity that may intoxicate the worshipper with joy. If
she liked a ploughed field, it was only as a spot of colour--not also as
a hint of the endless strength of the earth. And today she could approve
of one cloud, but object to its fellow. As for Miss Pembroke, she was
not approving or objecting at all. “A hero?” she queried, when the
interval had passed. Her voice was indifferent, as if she had been
thinking of other things.

“A hero? Yes. Didn’t you notice how heroic he was?”

“I don’t think I did.”

“Not at dinner? Ah, Agnes, always look out for heroism at dinner. It is
their great time. They live up to the stiffness of their shirt fronts.
Do you mean to say that you never noticed how he set down Rickie?”

“Oh, that about poetry!” said Agnes, laughing. “Rickie would not mind it
for a moment. But why do you single out that as heroic?”

“To snub people! to set them down! to be rude to them! to make them feel
small! Surely that’s the lifework of a hero?”

“I shouldn’t have said that. And as a matter of fact Mr. Wonham was
wrong over the poetry. I made Rickie look it up afterwards.”

“But of course. A hero always is wrong.”

“To me,” she persisted, rather gently, “a hero has always been a strong
wonderful being, who champions--”

“Ah, wait till you are the dragon! I have been a dragon most of my life,
I think. A dragon that wants nothing but a peaceful cave. Then in
comes the strong, wonderful, delightful being, and gains a princess
by piercing my hide. No, seriously, my dear Agnes, the chief
characteristics of a hero are infinite disregard for the feelings of
others, plus general inability to understand them.”

“But surely Mr. Wonham--”

“Yes; aren’t we being unkind to the poor boy. Ought we to go on
talking?”

Agnes waited, remembering the warnings of Rickie, and thinking that
anything she said might perhaps be repeated.

“Though even if he was here he wouldn’t understand what we are saying.”

“Wouldn’t understand?”

Mrs. Failing gave the least flicker of an eye towards her companion.
“Did you take him for clever?”

“I don’t think I took him for anything.” She smiled. “I have been
thinking of other things, and another boy.”

“But do think for a moment of Stephen. I will describe how he spent
yesterday. He rose at eight. From eight to eleven he sang. The song was
called, ‘Father’s boots will soon fit Willie.’ He stopped once to say to
the footman, ‘She’ll never finish her book. She idles: ‘She’ being I. At
eleven he went out, and stood in the rain till four, but had the luck
to see a child run over at the level-crossing. By half-past four he had
knocked the bottom out of Christianity.”

Agnes looked bewildered.

“Aren’t you impressed? I was. I told him that he was on no account to
unsettle the vicar. Open that cupboard, one of those sixpenny books
tells Podge that he’s made of hard little black things, another
that he’s made of brown things, larger and squashy. There seems a
discrepancy, but anything is better for a thoughtful youth than to be
made in the Garden of Eden. Let us eliminate the poetic, at whatever
cost to the probable.” When for a moment she spoke more gravely. “Here
he is at twenty, with nothing to hold on by. I don’t know what’s to be
done. I suppose it’s my fault. But I’ve never had any bother over the
Church of England; have you?”

“Of course I go with my Church,” said Miss Pembroke, who hated this
style of conversation. “I don’t know, I’m sure. I think you should
consult a man.”

“Would Rickie help me?”

“Rickie would do anything he can.” And Mrs. Failing noted the half
official way in which she vouched for her lover. “But of course Rickie
is a little--complicated. I doubt whether Mr. Wonham would understand
him. He wants--doesn’t he?--some one who’s a little more assertive and
more accustomed to boys. Some one more like my brother.”

“Agnes!” she seized her by the arm. “Do you suppose that Mr. Pembroke
would undertake my Podge?”

She shook her head. “His time is so filled up. He gets a boarding-house
next term. Besides--after all I don’t know what Herbert would do.”

“Morality. He would teach him morality. The Thirty-Nine Articles
may come of themselves, but if you have no morals you come to grief.
Morality is all I demand from Mr. Herbert Pembroke. He shall be excused
the use of the globes. You know, of course, that Stephen’s expelled from
a public school? He stole.”

The school was not a public one, and the expulsion, or rather request
for removal, had taken place when Stephen was fourteen. A violent
spasm of dishonesty--such as often heralds the approach of manhood--had
overcome him. He stole everything, especially what was difficult to
steal, and hid the plunder beneath a loose plank in the passage. He was
betrayed by the inclusion of a ham. This was the crisis of his career.
His benefactress was just then rather bored with him. He had stopped
being a pretty boy, and she rather doubted whether she would see him
through. But she was so raged with the letters of the schoolmaster, and
so delighted with those of the criminal, that she had him back and gave
him a prize.

“No,” said Agnes, “I didn’t know. I should be happy to speak to Herbert,
but, as I said, his time will be very full. But I know he has friends
who make a speciality of weakly or--or unusual boys.”

“My dear, I’ve tried it. Stephen kicked the weakly boys and robbed
apples with the unusual ones. He was expelled again.”

Agnes began to find Mrs. Failing rather tiresome. Wherever you trod on
her, she seemed to slip away from beneath your feet. Agnes liked to know
where she was and where other people were as well. She said: “My brother
thinks a great deal of home life. I daresay he’d think that Mr. Wonham
is best where he is--with you. You have been so kind to him. You”--she
paused--“have been to him both father and mother.”

“I’m too hot,” was Mrs. Failing’s reply. It seemed that Miss Pembroke
had at last touched a topic on which she was reticent. She rang the
electric bell,--it was only to tell the footman to take the reprints to
Mr. Wonham’s room,--and then murmuring something about work, proceeded
herself to the house.

“Mrs. Failing--” said Agnes, who had not expected such a speedy end to
their chat.

“Call me Aunt Emily. My dear?”

“Aunt Emily, what did you think of that story Rickie sent you?”

“It is bad,” said Mrs. Failing. “But. But. But.” Then she escaped,
having told the truth, and yet leaving a pleasurable impression behind
her.



XII

The excursion to Salisbury was but a poor business--in fact, Rickie
never got there. They were not out of the drive before Mr. Wonham began
doing acrobatics. He showed Rickie how very quickly he could turn round
in his saddle and sit with his face to Aeneas’s tail. “I see,” said
Rickie coldly, and became almost cross when they arrived in this
condition at the gate behind the house, for he had to open it, and was
afraid of falling. As usual, he anchored just beyond the fastenings, and
then had to turn Dido, who seemed as long as a battleship. To his relief
a man came forward, and murmuring, “Worst gate in the parish,” pushed it
wide and held it respectfully. “Thank you,” cried Rickie; “many
thanks.” But Stephen, who was riding into the world back first, said
majestically, “No, no; it doesn’t count. You needn’t think it does. You
make it worse by touching your hat. Four hours and seven minutes! You’ll
see me again.” The man answered nothing.

“Eh, but I’ll hurt him,” he chanted, as he swung into position. “That
was Flea. Eh, but he’s forgotten my fists; eh, but I’ll hurt him.”

“Why?” ventured Rickie. Last night, over cigarettes, he had been bored
to death by the story of Flea. The boy had a little reminded him of
Gerald--the Gerald of history, not the Gerald of romance. He was more
genial, but there was the same brutality, the same peevish insistence on
the pound of flesh.

“Hurt him till he learns.”

“Learns what?”

“Learns, of course,” retorted Stephen. Neither of them was very civil.
They did not dislike each other, but they each wanted to be somewhere
else--exactly the situation that Mrs. Failing had expected.

“He behaved badly,” said Rickie, “because he is poorer than we are, and
more ignorant. Less money has been spent on teaching him to behave.”

“Well, I’ll teach him for nothing.”

“Perhaps his fists are stronger than yours!”

“They aren’t. I looked.”

After this conversation flagged. Rickie glanced back at Cadover,
and thought of the insipid day that lay before him. Generally he was
attracted by fresh people, and Stephen was almost fresh: they had been
to him symbols of the unknown, and all that they did was interesting.
But now he cared for the unknown no longer. He knew.

Mr. Wilbraham passed them in his dog-cart, and lifted his hat to his
employer’s nephew. Stephen he ignored: he could not find him on the map.

“Good morning,” said Rickie. “What a lovely morning!”

“I say,” called the other, “another child dead!” Mr. Wilbraham, who had
seemed inclined to chat, whipped up his horse and left them.

“There goes an out and outer,” said Stephen; and then, as if introducing
an entirely new subject--“Don’t you think Flea Thompson treated me
disgracefully?”

“I suppose he did. But I’m scarcely the person to sympathize.” The
allusion fell flat, and he had to explain it. “I should have done the
same myself,--promised to be away two hours, and stopped four.”

“Stopped-oh--oh, I understand. You being in love, you mean?”

He smiled and nodded.

“Oh, I’ve no objection to Flea loving. He says he can’t help it. But as
long as my fists are stronger, he’s got to keep it in line.”

“In line?”

“A man like that, when he’s got a girl, thinks the rest can go to the
devil. He goes cutting his work and breaking his word. Wilbraham ought
to sack him. I promise you when I’ve a girl I’ll keep her in line, and
if she turns nasty, I’ll get another.”

Rickie smiled and said no more. But he was sorry that any one should
start life with such a creed--all the more sorry because the creed
caricatured his own. He too believed that life should be in a line--a
line of enormous length, full of countless interests and countless
figures, all well beloved. But woman was not to be “kept” to this line.
Rather did she advance it continually, like some triumphant general,
making each unit still more interesting, still more lovable, than it had
been before. He loved Agnes, not only for herself, but because she was
lighting up the human world. But he could scarcely explain this to an
inexperienced animal, nor did he make the attempt.

For a long time they proceeded in silence. The hill behind Cadover
was in harvest, and the horses moved regretfully between the sheaves.
Stephen had picked a grass leaf, and was blowing catcalls upon it. He
blew very well, and this morning all his soul went into the wail. For he
was ill. He was tortured with the feeling that he could not get away
and do--do something, instead of being civil to this anaemic prig. Four
hours in the rain was better than this: he had not wanted to fidget in
the rain. But now the air was like wine, and the stubble was smelling of
wet, and over his head white clouds trundled more slowly and more seldom
through broadening tracts of blue. There never had been such a morning,
and he shut up his eyes and called to it. And whenever he called, Rickie
shut up his eyes and winced.

At last the blade broke. “We don’t go quick, do we” he remarked, and
looked on the weedy track for another.

“I wish you wouldn’t let me keep you. If you were alone you would be
galloping or something of that sort.”

“I was told I must go your pace,” he said mournfully. “And you promised
Miss Pembroke not to hurry.”

“Well, I’ll disobey.” But he could not rise above a gentle trot, and
even that nearly jerked him out of the saddle.

“Sit like this,” said Stephen. “Can’t you see like this?” Rickie lurched
forward, and broke his thumb nail on the horse’s neck. It bled a little,
and had to be bound up.

“Thank you--awfully kind--no tighter, please--I’m simply spoiling your
day.”

“I can’t think how a man can help riding. You’ve only to leave it to the
horse so!--so!--just as you leave it to water in swimming.”

Rickie left it to Dido, who stopped immediately.

“I said LEAVE it.” His voice rose irritably. “I didn’t say ‘die.’ Of
course she stops if you die. First you sit her as if you’re Sandow
exercising, and then you sit like a corpse. Can’t you tell her you’re
alive? That’s all she wants.”

In trying to convey the information, Rickie dropped his whip. Stephen
picked it up and rammed it into the belt of his own Norfolk jacket. He
was scarcely a fashionable horseman. He was not even graceful. But he
rode as a living man, though Rickie was too much bored to notice it. Not
a muscle in him was idle, not a muscle working hard. When he returned
from the gallop his limbs were still unsatisfied and his manners still
irritable. He did not know that he was ill: he knew nothing about
himself at all.

“Like a howdah in the Zoo,” he grumbled. “Mother Failing will buy
elephants.” And he proceeded to criticize his benefactress. Rickie,
keenly alive to bad taste, tried to stop him, and gained instead a
criticism of religion. Stephen overthrew the Mosaic cosmogony. He
pointed out the discrepancies in the Gospels. He levelled his wit
against the most beautiful spire in the world, now rising against the
southern sky. Between whiles he went for a gallop. After a time Rickie
stopped listening, and simply went his way. For Dido was a perfect
mount, and as indifferent to the motions of Aeneas as if she was
strolling in the Elysian fields. He had had a bad night, and the strong
air made him sleepy. The wind blew from the Plain. Cadover and its
valley had disappeared, and though they had not climbed much and could
not see far, there was a sense of infinite space. The fields were
enormous, like fields on the Continent, and the brilliant sun showed up
their colours well. The green of the turnips, the gold of the harvest,
and the brown of the newly turned clods, were each contrasted with
morsels of grey down. But the general effect was pale, or rather
silvery, for Wiltshire is not a county of heavy tints. Beneath these
colours lurked the unconquerable chalk, and wherever the soil was poor
it emerged. The grassy track, so gay with scabious and bedstraw, was
snow-white at the bottom of its ruts. A dazzling amphitheatre gleamed
in the flank of a distant hill, cut for some Olympian audience. And
here and there, whatever the surface crop, the earth broke into little
embankments, little ditches, little mounds: there had been no lack of
drama to solace the gods.

In Cadover, the perilous house, Agnes had already parted from Mrs.
Failing. His thoughts returned to her. Was she, the soul of truth, in
safety? Was her purity vexed by the lies and selfishness? Would she
elude the caprice which had, he vaguely knew, caused suffering before?
Ah, the frailty of joy! Ah, the myriads of longings that pass without
fruition, and the turf grows over them! Better men, women as noble--they
had died up here and their dust had been mingled, but only their dust.
These are morbid thoughts, but who dare contradict them? There is much
good luck in the world, but it is luck. We are none of us safe. We
are children, playing or quarreling on the line, and some of us have
Rickie’s temperament, or his experiences, and admit it.

So he mused, that anxious little speck, and all the land seemed to
comment on his fears and on his love.

Their path lay upward, over a great bald skull, half grass, half
stubble. It seemed each moment there would be a splendid view. The view
never came, for none of the inclines were sharp enough, and they
moved over the skull for many minutes, scarcely shifting a landmark or
altering the blue fringe of the distance. The spire of Salisbury did
alter, but very slightly, rising and falling like the mercury in a
thermometer. At the most it would be half hidden; at the least the
tip would show behind the swelling barrier of earth. They passed two
elder-trees--a great event. The bare patch, said Stephen, was owing to
the gallows. Rickie nodded. He had lost all sense of incident. In this
great solitude--more solitary than any Alpine range--he and Agnes
were floating alone and for ever, between the shapeless earth and the
shapeless clouds. An immense silence seemed to move towards them. A lark
stopped singing, and they were glad of it. They were approaching the
Throne of God. The silence touched them; the earth and all danger
dissolved, but ere they quite vanished Rickie heard himself saying, “Is
it exactly what we intended?”

“Yes,” said a man’s voice; “it’s the old plan.” They were in another
valley. Its sides were thick with trees. Down it ran another stream
and another road: it, too, sheltered a string of villages. But all
was richer, larger, and more beautiful--the valley of the Avon below
Amesbury.

“I’ve been asleep!” said Rickie, in awestruck tones.

“Never!” said the other facetiously. “Pleasant dreams?”

“Perhaps--I’m really tired of apologizing to you. How long have you been
holding me on?”

“All in the day’s work.” He gave him back the reins.

“Where’s that round hill?”

“Gone where the good niggers go. I want a drink.”

This is Nature’s joke in Wiltshire--her one joke. You toil on windy
slopes, and feel very primeval. You are miles from your fellows, and lo!
a little valley full of elms and cottages. Before Rickie had waked up to
it, they had stopped by a thatched public-house, and Stephen was yelling
like a maniac for beer.

There was no occasion to yell. He was not very thirsty, and they were
quite ready to serve him. Nor need he have drunk in the saddle, with the
air of a warrior who carries important dispatches and has not the time
to dismount. A real soldier, bound on a similar errand, rode up to the
inn, and Stephen feared that he would yell louder, and was hostile. But
they made friends and treated each other, and slanged the proprietor and
ragged the pretty girls; while Rickie, as each wave of vulgarity burst
over him, sunk his head lower and lower, and wished that the earth
would swallow him up. He was only used to Cambridge, and to a very small
corner of that. He and his friends there believed in free speech.
But they spoke freely about generalities. They were scientific and
philosophic. They would have shrunk from the empirical freedom that
results from a little beer.

That was what annoyed him as he rode down the new valley with two
chattering companions. He was more skilled than they were in the
principles of human existence, but he was not so indecently familiar
with the examples. A sordid village scandal--such as Stephen described
as a huge joke--sprang from certain defects in human nature, with which
he was theoretically acquainted. But the example! He blushed at it like
a maiden lady, in spite of its having a parallel in a beautiful idyll of
Theocritus. Was experience going to be such a splendid thing after all?
Were the outside of houses so very beautiful?

“That’s spicy!” the soldier was saying. “Got any more like that?”

“I’se got a pome,” said Stephen, and drew a piece of paper from his
pocket. The valley had broadened. Old Sarum rose before them, ugly and
majestic.

“Write this yourself?” he asked, chuckling.

“Rather,” said Stephen, lowering his head and kissing Aeneas between the
ears.

“But who’s old Em’ly?” Rickie winced and frowned.

“Now you’re asking.

“Old Em’ly she limps, And as--”

“I am so tired,” said Rickie. Why should he stand it any longer?

He would go home to the woman he loved. “Do you mind if I give up
Salisbury?”

“But we’ve seen nothing!” cried Stephen.

“I shouldn’t enjoy anything, I am so absurdly tired.”

“Left turn, then--all in the day’s work.” He bit at his moustache
angrily.

“Good gracious me, man!--of course I’m going back alone. I’m not going
to spoil your day. How could you think it of me?”

Stephen gave a loud sigh of relief. “If you do want to go home, here’s
your whip. Don’t fall off. Say to her you wanted it, or there might be
ructions.”

“Certainly. Thank you for your kind care of me.”

“‘Old Em’ly she limps, And as--’”

Soon he was out of earshot. Soon they were lost to view. Soon they were
out of his thoughts. He forgot the coarseness and the drinking and the
ingratitude. A few months ago he would not have forgotten so quickly,
and he might also have detected something else. But a lover is dogmatic.
To him the world shall be beautiful and pure. When it is not, he ignores
it.

“He’s not tired,” said Stephen to the soldier; “he wants his girl.” And
they winked at each other, and cracked jokes over the eternal comedy of
love. They asked each other if they’d let a girl spoil a morning’s ride.
They both exhibited a profound cynicism. Stephen, who was quite without
ballast, described the household at Cadover: he should say that Rickie
would find Miss Pembroke kissing the footman.

“I say the footman’s kissing old Em’ly.”

“Jolly day,” said Stephen. His voice was suddenly constrained. He was
not sure whether he liked the soldier after all, nor whether he had been
wise in showing him his compositions.

“‘Old Em’ly she limps, And as--’”

“All right, Thomas. That’ll do.”

“Old Em’ly--’”

“I wish you’d dry up, like a good fellow. This is the lady’s horse, you
know, hang it, after all.”

“In-deed!”

“Don’t you see--when a fellow’s on a horse, he can’t let another
fellow--kind of--don’t you know?”

The man did know. “There’s sense in that.” he said approvingly. Peace
was restored, and they would have reached Salisbury if they had not had
some more beer. It unloosed the soldier’s fancies, and again he spoke of
old Em’ly, and recited the poem, with Aristophanic variations.

“Jolly day,” repeated Stephen, with a straightening of the eyebrows
and a quick glance at the other’s body. He then warned him against
the variations. In consequence he was accused of being a member of the
Y.M.C.A. His blood boiled at this. He refuted the charge, and became
great friends with the soldier, for the third time.

“Any objection to ‘Saucy Mr. and Mrs. Tackleton’?”

“Rather not.”

The soldier sang “Saucy Mr. and Mrs. Tackleton.” It is really a work
for two voices, most of the sauciness disappearing when taken as a solo.
Nor is Mrs. Tackleton’s name Em’lv.

“I call it a jolly rotten song,” said Stephen crossly. “I won’t stand
being got at.”

“P’r’aps y’like therold song. Lishen.

     “‘Of all the gulls that arsshmart,
     There’s none line pretty--Em’ly;
     For she’s the darling of merart’”

“Now, that’s wrong.” He rode up close to the singer.

“Shright.”

“‘Tisn’t.”

“It’s as my mother taught me.”

“I don’t care.”

“I’ll not alter from mother’s way.”

Stephen was baffled. Then he said, “How does your mother make it rhyme?”

“Wot?”

“Squat. You’re an ass, and I’m not. Poems want rhymes. ‘Alley’ comes
next line.”

He said “alley” was--welcome to come if it liked.

“It can’t. You want Sally. Sally--alley. Em’ly-alley doesn’t do.”

“Emily-femily!” cried the soldier, with an inspiration that was not his
when sober. “My mother taught me femily.

“‘For she’s the darling of merart, And she lives in my femily.’”

“Well, you’d best be careful, Thomas, and your mother too.”

“Your mother’s no better than she should be,” said Thomas vaguely.

“Do you think I haven’t heard that before?” retorted the boy. The other
concluded he might now say anything. So he might--the name of old Emily
excepted. Stephen cared little about his benefactress’s honour, but a
great deal about his own. He had made Mrs. Failing into a test. For the
moment he would die for her, as a knight would die for a glove. He is
not to be distinguished from a hero.

Old Sarum was passed. They approached the most beautiful spire in
the world. “Lord! another of these large churches!” said the soldier.
Unfriendly to Gothic, he lifted both hands to his nose, and declared
that old Em’ly was buried there. He lay in the mud. His horse trotted
back towards Amesbury, Stephen had twisted him out of the saddle.

“I’ve done him!” he yelled, though no one was there to hear. He rose up
in his stirrups and shouted with joy. He flung his arms round Aeneas’s
neck. The elderly horse understood, capered, and bolted. It was a
centaur that dashed into Salisbury and scattered the people. In
the stable he would not dismount. “I’ve done him!” he yelled to the
ostlers--apathetic men. Stretching upwards, he clung to a beam. Aeneas
moved on and he was left hanging. Greatly did he incommode them by his
exercises. He pulled up, he circled, he kicked the other customers. At
last he fell to the earth, deliciously fatigued. His body worried him no
longer.

He went, like the baby he was, to buy a white linen hat. There were
soldiers about, and he thought it would disguise him. Then he had a
little lunch to steady the beer. This day had turned out admirably. All
the money that should have fed Rickie he could spend on himself. Instead
of toiling over the Cathedral and seeing the stuffed penguins, he could
stop the whole thing in the cattle market. There he met and made some
friends. He watched the cheap-jacks, and saw how necessary it was to
have a confident manner. He spoke confidently himself about lambs, and
people listened. He spoke confidently about pigs, and they roared with
laughter. He must learn more about pigs. He witnessed a performance--not
too namby-pamby--of Punch and Judy. “Hullo, Podge!” cried a naughty
little girl. He tried to catch her, and failed. She was one of the
Cadford children. For Salisbury on market day, though it is not
picturesque, is certainly representative, and you read the names of
half the Wiltshire villages upon the carriers’ carts. He found, in Penny
Farthing Street, the cart from Wintersbridge. It would not start for
several hours, but the passengers always used it as a club, and sat in
it every now and then during the day. No less than three ladies were
these now, staring at the shafts. One of them was Flea Thompson’s girl.
He asked her, quite politely, why her lover had broken faith with him
in the rain. She was silent. He warned her of approaching vengeance. She
was still silent, but another woman hoped that a gentleman would not
be hard on a poor person. Something in this annoyed him; it wasn’t a
question of gentility and poverty--it was a question of two men. He
determined to go back by Cadbury Rings where the shepherd would now be.

He did. But this part must be treated lightly. He rode up to the culprit
with the air of a Saint George, spoke a few stern words from the saddle,
tethered his steed to a hurdle, and took off his coat. “Are you ready?”
 he asked.

“Yes, sir,” said Flea, and flung him on his back.

“That’s not fair,” he protested.

The other did not reply, but flung him on his head.

“How on earth did you learn that?”

“By trying often,” said Flea.

Stephen sat on the ground, picking mud out of his forehead. “I meant it
to be fists,” he said gloomily.

“I know, sir.”

“It’s jolly smart though, and--and I beg your pardon all round.” It
cost him a great deal to say this, but he was sure that it was the right
thing to say. He must acknowledge the better man. Whereas most people,
if they provoke a fight and are flung, say, “You cannot rob me of my
moral victory.”

There was nothing further to be done. He mounted again, not exactly
depressed, but feeling that this delightful world is extraordinarily
unreliable. He had never expected to fling the soldier, or to be
flung by Flea. “One nips or is nipped,” he thought, “and never knows
beforehand. I should not be surprised if many people had more in them
than I suppose, while others were just the other way round. I haven’t
seen that sort of thing in Ingersoll, but it’s quite important.” Then
his thoughts turned to a curious incident of long ago, when he had been
“nipped”--as a little boy. He was trespassing in those woods, when
he met in a narrow glade a flock of sheep. They had neither dog nor
shepherd, and advanced towards him silently. He was accustomed to sheep,
but had never happened to meet them in a wood before, and disliked it.
He retired, slowly at first, then fast; and the flock, in a dense mass,
pressed after him. His terror increased. He turned and screamed at their
long white faces; and still they came on, all stuck together, like some
horrible jell--. If once he got into them! Bellowing and screeching, he
rushed into the undergrowth, tore himself all over, and reached home in
convulsions. Mr. Failing, his only grown-up friend, was sympathetic, but
quite stupid. “Pan ovium custos,” he sympathetic, as he pulled out the
thorns. “Why not?” “Pan ovium custos.” Stephen learnt the meaning of the
phrase at school, “A pan of eggs for custard.” He still remembered how
the other boys looked as he peeped at them between his legs, awaiting
the descending cane.

So he returned, full of pleasant disconnected thoughts. He had had a
rare good time. He liked every one--even that poor little Elliot--and
yet no one mattered. They were all out. On the landing he saw the
housemaid. He felt skittish and irresistible. Should he slip his arm
round her waist? Perhaps better not; she might box his ears. And he
wanted to smoke on the roof before dinner. So he only said, “Please will
you stop the boy blacking my brown boots,” and she with downcast eyes,
answered, “Yes, sir; I will indeed.”

His room was in the pediment. Classical architecture, like all things in
this world that attempt serenity, is bound to have its lapses into the
undignified, and Cadover lapsed hopelessly when it came to Stephen’s
room. It gave him one round window, to see through which he must lie
upon his stomach, one trapdoor opening upon the leads, three iron
girders, three beams, six buttresses, no circling, unless you count the
walls, no walls unless you count the ceiling and in its embarrassment
presented him with the gurgly cistern that supplied the bath water. Here
he lived, absolutely happy, and unaware that Mrs. Failing had poked him
up here on purpose, to prevent him from growing too bumptious. Here he
worked and sang and practised on the ocharoon. Here, in the crannies, he
had constructed shelves and cupboards and useless little drawers. He had
only one picture--the Demeter of Onidos--and she hung straight from the
roof like a joint of meat. Once she was in the drawing-room; but
Mrs. Failing had got tired of her, and decreed her removal and this
degradation. Now she faced the sunrise; and when the moon rose its light
also fell on her, and trembled, like light upon the sea. For she was
never still, and if the draught increased she would twist on her string,
and would sway and tap upon the rafters until Stephen woke up and said
what he thought of her. “Want your nose?” he would murmur. “Don’t you
wish you may get it” Then he drew the clothes over his ears, while above
him, in the wind and the darkness, the goddess continued her motions.

Today, as he entered, he trod on the pile of sixpenny reprints. Leighton
had brought them up. He looked at the portraits in their covers, and
began to think that these people were not everything. What a fate,
to look like Colonel Ingersoll, or to marry Mrs. Julia P. Chunk! The
Demeter turned towards him as he bathed, and in the cold water he sang--

     “They aren’t beautiful, they aren’t modest;
     I’d just as soon follow an old stone goddess,”

and sprang upward through the skylight on to the roof. Years ago, when
a nurse was washing him, he had slipped from her soapy hands and got up
here. She implored him to remember that he was a little gentleman; but
he forgot the fact--if it was a fact--and not even the butler could get
him down. Mr. Failing, who was sitting alone in the garden too ill to
read, heard a shout, “Am I an acroterium?” He looked up and saw a naked
child poised on the summit of Cadover. “Yes,” he replied; “but they are
unfashionable. Go in,” and the vision had remained with him as something
peculiarly gracious. He felt that nonsense and beauty have close
connections,--closer connections than Art will allow,--and that both
would remain when his own heaviness and his own ugliness had perished.
Mrs. Failing found in his remains a sentence that puzzled her. “I see
the respectable mansion. I see the smug fortress of culture. The doors
are shut. The windows are shut. But on the roof the children go dancing
for ever.”

Stephen was a child no longer. He never stood on the pediment now,
except for a bet. He never, or scarcely ever, poured water down the
chimneys. When he caught the cat, he seldom dropped her into the
housekeeper’s bedroom. But still, when the weather was fair, he liked to
come up after bathing, and get dry in the sun. Today he brought with him
a towel, a pipe of tobacco, and Rickie’s story. He must get it done some
time, and he was tired of the six-penny reprints. The sloping gable
was warm, and he lay back on it with closed eyes, gasping for pleasure.
Starlings criticized him, snots fell on his clean body, and over him a
little cloud was tinged with the colours of evening. “Good! good!” he
whispered. “Good, oh good!” and opened the manuscript reluctantly.

What a production! Who was this girl? Where did she go to? Why so much
talk about trees? “I take it he wrote it when feeling bad,” he murmured,
and let it fall into the gutter. It fell face downwards, and on the back
he saw a neat little resume in Miss Pembroke’s handwriting, intended for
such as him. “Allegory. Man = modern civilization (in bad sense). Girl =
getting into touch with Nature.”

In touch with Nature! The girl was a tree! He lit his pipe and gazed at
the radiant earth. The foreground was hidden, but there was the village
with its elms, and the Roman Road, and Cadbury Rings. There, too, were
those woods, and little beech copses, crowning a waste of down. Not to
mention the air, or the sun, or water. Good, oh good!

In touch with Nature! What cant would the books think of next? His eyes
closed. He was sleepy. Good, oh good! Sighing into his pipe, he fell
asleep.



XIII

Glad as Agnes was when her lover returned for lunch, she was at the
same time rather dismayed: she knew that Mrs. Failing would not like her
plans altered. And her dismay was justified. Their hostess was a little
stiff, and asked whether Stephen had been obnoxious.

“Indeed he hasn’t. He spent the whole time looking after me.”

“From which I conclude he was more obnoxious than usual.” Rickie praised
him diligently. But his candid nature showed everything through. His
aunt soon saw that they had not got on. She had expected this--almost
planned it. Nevertheless she resented it, and her resentment was to fall
on him.

The storm gathered slowly, and many other things went to swell it.
Weakly people, if they are not careful, hate one another, and when the
weakness is hereditary the temptation increases. Elliots had never got
on among themselves. They talked of “The Family,” but they always turned
outwards to the health and beauty that lie so promiscuously about the
world. Rickie’s father had turned, for a time at all events, to his
mother. Rickie himself was turning to Agnes. And Mrs. Failing now was
irritable, and unfair to the nephew who was lame like her horrible
brother and like herself. She thought him invertebrate and conventional.
She was envious of his happiness. She did not trouble to understand his
art. She longed to shatter him, but knowing as she did that the human
thunderbolt often rebounds and strikes the wielder, she held her hand.

Agnes watched the approaching clouds. Rickie had warned her; now she
began to warn him. As the visit wore away she urged him to be pleasant
to his aunt, and so convert it into a success.

He replied, “Why need it be a success?”--a reply in the manner of
Ansell.

She laughed. “Oh, that’s so like you men--all theory! What about your
great theory of hating no one? As soon as it comes in useful you drop
it.”

“I don’t hate Aunt Emily. Honestly. But certainly I don’t want to be
near her or think about her. Don’t you think there are two great things
in life that we ought to aim at--truth and kindness? Let’s have both if
we can, but let’s be sure of having one or the other. My aunt gives up
both for the sake of being funny.”

“And Stephen Wonham,” pursued Agnes. “There’s another person you
hate--or don’t think about, if you prefer it put like that.”

“The truth is, I’m changing. I’m beginning to see that the world has
many people in it who don’t matter. I had time for them once. Not now.”
 There was only one gate to the kingdom of heaven now.

Agnes surprised him by saying, “But the Wonham boy is evidently a part
of your aunt’s life. She laughs at him, but she is fond of him.”

“What’s that to do with it?”

“You ought to be pleasant to him on account of it.”

“Why on earth?”

She flushed a little. “I’m old-fashioned. One ought to consider one’s
hostess, and fall in with her life. After we leave it’s another thing.
But while we take her hospitality I think it’s our duty.”

Her good sense triumphed. Henceforth he tried to fall in with Aunt
Emily’s life. Aunt Emily watched him trying. The storm broke, as storms
sometimes do, on Sunday.

Sunday church was a function at Cadover, though a strange one. The
pompous landau rolled up to the house at a quarter to eleven. Then Mrs.
Failing said, “Why am I being hurried?” and after an interval descended
the steps in her ordinary clothes. She regarded the church as a sort of
sitting-room, and refused even to wear a bonnet there. The village was
shocked, but at the same time a little proud; it would point out the
carriage to strangers and gossip about the pale smiling lady who sat in
it, always alone, always late, her hair always draped in an expensive
shawl.

This Sunday, though late as usual, she was not alone. Miss Pembroke,
en grande toilette, sat by her side. Rickie, looking plain and devout,
perched opposite. And Stephen actually came too, murmuring that it would
be the Benedicite, which he had never minded. There was also the Litany,
which drove him into the air again, much to Mrs. Failing’s delight. She
enjoyed this sort of thing. It amused her when her Protege left the pew,
looking bored, athletic, and dishevelled, and groping most obviously for
his pipe. She liked to keep a thoroughbred pagan to shock people. “He’s
gone to worship Nature,” she whispered. Rickie did not look up. “Don’t
you think he’s charming?” He made no reply.

“Charming,” whispered Agnes over his head.

During the sermon she analysed her guests. Miss
Pembroke--undistinguished, unimaginative, tolerable.
Rickie--intolerable. “And how pedantic!” she mused. “He smells of the
University library. If he was stupid in the right way he would be a
don.” She looked round the tiny church; at the whitewashed pillars,
the humble pavement, the window full of magenta saints. There was
the vicar’s wife. And Mrs. Wilbraham’s bonnet. Ugh! The rest of the
congregation were poor women, with flat, hopeless faces--she saw them
Sunday after Sunday, but did not know their names--diversified with a
few reluctant plough-boys, and the vile little school children row upon
row. “Ugh! what a hole,” thought Mrs. Failing, whose Christianity was
the type best described as “cathedral.” “What a hole for a cultured
woman! I don’t think it has blunted my sensations, though; I still
see its squalor as clearly as ever. And my nephew pretends he is
worshipping. Pah! the hypocrite.” Above her the vicar spoke of the
danger of hurrying from one dissipation to another. She treasured his
words, and continued: “I cannot stand smugness. It is the one, the
unpardonable sin. Fresh air! The fresh air that has made Stephen Wonham
fresh and companionable and strong. Even if it kills, I will let in the
fresh air.”

Thus reasoned Mrs. Failing, in the facile vein of Ibsenism. She imagined
herself to be a cold-eyed Scandinavian heroine. Really she was an
English old lady, who did not mind giving other people a chill provided
it was not infectious.

Agnes, on the way back, noted that her hostess was a little snappish.
But one is so hungry after morning service, and either so hot or so
cold, that he would be a saint indeed who becomes a saint at once. Mrs.
Failing, after asserting vindictively that it was impossible to make
a living out of literature, was courteously left alone. Roast-beef
and moselle might yet work miracles, and Agnes still hoped for the
introductions--the introductions to certain editors and publishers--on
which her whole diplomacy was bent. Rickie would not push himself. It
was his besetting sin. Well for him that he would have a wife, and a
loving wife, who knew the value of enterprise.

Unfortunately lunch was a quarter of an hour late, and during that
quarter of an hour the aunt and the nephew quarrelled. She had been
inveighing against the morning service, and he quietly and deliberately
replied, “If organized religion is anything--and it is something to
me--it will not be wrecked by a harmonium and a dull sermon.”

Mrs. Failing frowned. “I envy you. It is a great thing to have no sense
of beauty.”

“I think I have a sense of beauty, which leads me astray if I am not
careful.”

“But this is a great relief to me. I thought the present day young man
was an agnostic! Isn’t agnosticism all the thing at Cambridge?”

“Nothing is the ‘thing’ at Cambridge. If a few men are agnostic there,
it is for some grave reason, not because they are irritated with the way
the parson says his vowels.”

Agnes intervened. “Well, I side with Aunt Emily. I believe in ritual.”

“Don’t, my dear, side with me. He will only say you have no sense of
religion either.”

“Excuse me,” said Rickie, perhaps he too was a little hungry,--“I never
suggested such a thing. I never would suggest such a thing. Why cannot
you understand my position? I almost feel it is that you won’t.”

“I try to understand your position night and day dear--what you mean,
what you like, why you came to Cadover, and why you stop here when my
presence is so obviously unpleasing to you.”

“Luncheon is served,” said Leighton, but he said it too late. They
discussed the beef and the moselle in silence. The air was heavy and
ominous. Even the Wonham boy was affected by it, shivered at times,
choked once, and hastened anew into the sun. He could not understand
clever people.

Agnes, in a brief anxious interview, advised the culprit to take a
solitary walk. She would stop near Aunt Emily, and pave the way for an
apology.

“Don’t worry too much. It doesn’t really matter.”

“I suppose not, dear. But it seems a pity, considering we are so near
the end of our visit.”

“Rudeness and Grossness matter, and I’ve shown both, and already I’m
sorry, and I hope she’ll let me apologize. But from the selfish point of
view it doesn’t matter a straw. She’s no more to us than the Wonham boy
or the boot boy.”

“Which way will you walk?”

“I think to that entrenchment. Look at it.” They were sitting on the
steps. He stretched out his hand to Cadsbury Rings, and then let it rest
for a moment on her shoulder. “You’re changing me,” he said gently. “God
bless you for it.”

He enjoyed his walk. Cadford was a charming village and for a time he
hung over the bridge by the mill. So clear was the stream that it seemed
not water at all, but some invisible quintessence in which the happy
minnows and the weeds were vibrating. And he paused again at the Roman
crossing, and thought for a moment of the unknown child. The line curved
suddenly: certainly it was dangerous. Then he lifted his eyes to the
down. The entrenchment showed like the rim of a saucer, and over
its narrow line peeped the summit of the central tree. It looked
interesting. He hurried forward, with the wind behind him.

The Rings were curious rather than impressive. Neither embankment was
over twelve feet high, and the grass on them had not the exquisite
green of Old Sarum, but was grey and wiry. But Nature (if she arranges
anything) had arranged that from them, at all events, there should be a
view. The whole system of the country lay spread before Rickie, and he
gained an idea of it that he never got in his elaborate ride. He saw how
all the water converges at Salisbury; how Salisbury lies in a shallow
basin, just at the change of the soil. He saw to the north the Plain,
and the stream of the Cad flowing down from it, with a tributary that
broke out suddenly, as the chalk streams do: one village had clustered
round the source and clothed itself with trees. He saw Old Sarum, and
hints of the Avon valley, and the land above Stone Henge. And behind him
he saw the great wood beginning unobtrusively, as if the down too needed
shaving; and into it the road to London slipped, covering the bushes
with white dust. Chalk made the dust white, chalk made the water clear,
chalk made the clean rolling outlines of the land, and favoured the
grass and the distant coronals of trees. Here is the heart of our
island: the Chilterns, the North Downs, the South Downs radiate hence.
The fibres of England unite in Wiltshire, and did we condescend to
worship her, here we should erect our national shrine.

People at that time were trying to think imperially, Rickie wondered how
they did it, for he could not imagine a place larger than England.
And other people talked of Italy, the spiritual fatherland of us all.
Perhaps Italy would prove marvellous. But at present he conceived it as
something exotic, to be admired and reverenced, but not to be loved like
these unostentatious fields. He drew out a book, it was natural for him
to read when he was happy, and to read out loud,--and for a little time
his voice disturbed the silence of that glorious afternoon. The book was
Shelley, and it opened at a passage that he had cherished greatly two
years before, and marked as “very good.”

“I never was attached to that great sect Whose doctrine is that each one
should select Out of the world a mistress or a friend, And all the rest,
though fair and wise, commend To cold oblivion,--though it is the code
Of modern morals, and the beaten road Which those poor slaves with weary
footsteps tread Who travel to their home among the dead By the broad
highway of the world,--and so With one sad friend, perhaps a jealous
foe, The dreariest and the longest journey go.”

It was “very good”--fine poetry, and, in a sense, true. Yet he was
surprised that he had ever selected it so vehemently. This afternoon it
seemed a little inhuman. Half a mile off two lovers were keeping company
where all the villagers could see them. They cared for no one else;
they felt only the pressure of each other, and so progressed, silent
and oblivious, across the land. He felt them to be nearer the truth
than Shelley. Even if they suffered or quarrelled, they would have been
nearer the truth. He wondered whether they were Henry Adams and Jessica
Thompson, both of this parish, whose banns had been asked for the second
time in the church this morning. Why could he not marry on fifteen
shillings a-week? And be looked at them with respect, and wished that he
was not a cumbersome gentleman.

Presently he saw something less pleasant--his aunt’s pony carriage. It
had crossed the railway, and was advancing up the Roman road along by
the straw sacks. His impulse was to retreat, but someone waved to him.
It was Agnes. She waved continually, as much as to say, “Wait for us.”
 Mrs. Failing herself raised the whip in a nonchalant way. Stephen Wonham
was following on foot, some way behind. He put the Shelley back into his
pocket and waited for them. When the carriage stopped by some hurdles
he went down from the embankment and helped them to dismount. He felt
rather nervous.

His aunt gave him one of her disquieting smiles, but said pleasantly
enough, “Aren’t the Rings a little immense? Agnes and I came here
because we wanted an antidote to the morning service.”

“Pang!” said the church bell suddenly; “pang! pang!” It sounded petty
and ludicrous. They all laughed. Rickie blushed, and Agnes, with a
glance that said “apologize,” darted away to the entrenchment, as though
unable to restrain her curiosity.

“The pony won’t move,” said Mrs. Failing. “Leave him for Stephen to tie
up. Will you walk me to the tree in the middle? Booh! I’m tired. Give me
your arm--unless you’re tired as well.”

“No. I came out partly in the hope of helping you.”

“How sweet of you.” She contrasted his blatant unselfishness with the
hardness of Stephen. Stephen never came out to help you. But if you got
hold of him he was some good. He didn’t wobble and bend at the critical
moment. Her fancy compared Rickie to the cracked church bell sending
forth its message of “Pang! pang!” to the countryside, and Stephen to
the young pagans who were said to lie under this field guarding their
pagan gold.

“This place is full of ghosties,” she remarked; “have you seen any yet?”

“I’ve kept on the outer rim so far.”

“Let’s go to the tree in the centre.”

“Here’s the path.” The bank of grass where he had sat was broken by a
gap, through which chariots had entered, and farm carts entered now. The
track, following the ancient track, led straight through turnips to a
similar gap in the second circle, and thence continued, through more
turnips, to the central tree.

“Pang!” said the bell, as they paused at the entrance.

“You needn’t unharness,” shouted Mrs. Failing, for Stephen was
approaching the carriage.

“Yes, I will,” he retorted.

“You will, will you?” she murmured with a smile. “I wish your brother
wasn’t quite so uppish. Let’s get on. Doesn’t that church distract you?”

“It’s so faint here,” said Rickie. And it sounded fainter inside, though
the earthwork was neither thick nor tall; and the view, though not
hidden, was greatly diminished. He was reminded for a minute of that
chalk pit near Madingley, whose ramparts excluded the familiar world.
Agnes was here, as she had once been there. She stood on the farther
barrier, waiting to receive them when they had traversed the heart of
the camp.

“Admire my mangel-wurzels,” said Mrs. Failing. “They are said to grow
so splendidly on account of the dead soldiers. Isn’t it a sweet thought?
Need I say it is your brother’s?”

“Wonham’s?” he suggested. It was the second time that she had made the
little slip. She nodded, and he asked her what kind of ghosties haunted
this curious field.

“The D.,” was her prompt reply. “He leans against the tree in the
middle, especially on Sunday afternoons and all the worshippers rise
through the turnips and dance round him.”

“Oh, these were decent people,” he replied, looking downwards--“soldiers
and shepherds. They have no ghosts. They worshipped Mars or Pan-Erda
perhaps; not the devil.”

“Pang!” went the church, and was silent, for the afternoon service
had begun. They entered the second entrenchment, which was in height,
breadth, and composition, similar to the first, and excluded still more
of the view. His aunt continued friendly. Agnes stood watching them.

“Soldiers may seem decent in the past,” she continued, “but wait till
they turn into Tommies from Bulford Camp, who rob the chickens.”

“I don’t mind Bulford Camp,” said Rickie, looking, though in vain, for
signs of its snowy tents. “The men there are the sons of the men here,
and have come back to the old country. War’s horrible, yet one loves all
continuity. And no one could mind a shepherd.”

“Indeed! What about your brother--a shepherd if ever there was? Look how
he bores you! Don’t be so sentimental.”

“But--oh, you mean--”

“Your brother Stephen.”

He glanced at her nervously. He had never known her so queer before.
Perhaps it was some literary allusion that he had not caught; but her
face did not at that moment suggest literature. In the differential
tones that one uses to an old and infirm person he said “Stephen Wonham
isn’t my brother, Aunt Emily.”

“My dear, you’re that precise. One can’t say ‘half-brother’ every time.”

They approached the central tree.

“How you do puzzle me,” he said, dropping her arm and beginning to
laugh. “How could I have a half-brother?”

She made no answer.

Then a horror leapt straight at him, and he beat it back and said,
“I will not be frightened.” The tree in the centre revolved, the tree
disappeared, and he saw a room--the room where his father had lived in
town. “Gently,” he told himself, “gently.” Still laughing, he said, “I,
with a brother-younger it’s not possible.” The horror leapt again, and
he exclaimed, “It’s a foul lie!”

“My dear, my dear!”

“It’s a foul lie! He wasn’t--I won’t stand--”

“My dear, before you say several noble things, remember that it’s worse
for him than for you--worse for your brother, for your half-brother, for
your younger brother.”

But he heard her no longer. He was gazing at the past, which he had
praised so recently, which gaped ever wider, like an unhallowed grave.
Turn where he would, it encircled him. It took visible form: it was this
double entrenchment of the Rings. His mouth went cold, and he knew that
he was going to faint among the dead. He started running, missed the
exit, stumbled on the inner barrier, fell into darkness--

“Get his head down,” said a voice. “Get the blood back into him.
That’s all he wants. Leave him to me. Elliot!”--the blood was
returning--“Elliot, wake up!”

He woke up. The earth he had dreaded lay close to his eyes, and seemed
beautiful. He saw the structure of the clods. A tiny beetle swung on
the grass blade. On his own neck a human hand pressed, guiding the blood
back to his brain.

There broke from him a cry, not of horror but of acceptance. For one
short moment he understood. “Stephen--” he began, and then he heard his
own name called: “Rickie! Rickie!” Agnes hurried from her post on the
margin, and, as if understanding also, caught him to her breast.

Stephen offered to help them further, but finding that he made things
worse, he stepped aside to let them pass and then sauntered inwards. The
whole field, with concentric circles, was visible, and the broad leaves
of the turnips rustled in the gathering wind. Miss Pembroke and Elliot
were moving towards the Cadover entrance. Mrs. Failing stood watching in
her turn on the opposite bank. He was not an inquisitive boy; but as he
leant against the tree he wondered what it was all about, and whether he
would ever know.



XIV

On the way back--at that very level-crossing where he had paused on
his upward route--Rickie stopped suddenly and told the girl why he had
fainted. Hitherto she had asked him in vain. His tone had gone from him,
and he told her harshly and brutally, so that she started away with
a horrified cry. Then his manner altered, and he exclaimed: “Will you
mind? Are you going to mind?”

“Of course I mind,” she whispered. She turned from him, and saw up on
the sky-line two figures that seemed to be of enormous size.

“They’re watching us. They stand on the edge watching us. This country’s
so open--you--you can’t they watch us wherever we go. Of course you
mind.”

They heard the rumble of the train, and she pulled herself together.
“Come, dearest, we shall be run over next. We’re saying things that have
no sense.” But on the way back he repeated: “They can still see us. They
can see every inch of this road. They watch us for ever.” And when they
arrived at the steps there, sure enough, were still the two figures
gazing from the outer circle of the Rings.

She made him go to his room at once: he was almost hysterical. Leighton
brought out some tea for her, and she sat drinking it on the little
terrace. Of course she minded.

Again she was menaced by the abnormal. All had seemed so fair and so
simple, so in accordance with her ideas; and then, like a corpse, this
horror rose up to the surface. She saw the two figures descend and pause
while one of them harnessed the pony; she saw them drive downward, and
knew that before long she must face them and the world. She glanced at
her engagement ring.

When the carriage drove up Mrs. Failing dismounted, but did not speak.
It was Stephen who inquired after Rickie. She, scarcely knowing the
sound of her own voice, replied that he was a little tired.

“Go and put up the pony,” said Mrs. Failing rather sharply.

“Agnes, give me some tea.”

“It is rather strong,” said Agnes as the carriage drove off and left
them alone. Then she noticed that Mrs. Failing herself was agitated. Her
lips were trembling, and she saw the boy depart with manifest relief.

“Do you know,” she said hurriedly, as if talking against time--“Do you
know what upset Rickie?”

“I do indeed know.”

“Has he told any one else?”

“I believe not.”

“Agnes--have I been a fool?”

“You have been very unkind,” said the girl, and her eyes filled with
tears.

For a moment Mrs. Failing was annoyed. “Unkind? I do not see that at
all. I believe in looking facts in the face. Rickie must know his ghosts
some time. Why not this afternoon?”

She rose with quiet dignity, but her tears came faster. “That is not so.
You told him to hurt him. I cannot think what you did it for. I suppose
because he was rude to you after church. It is a mean, cowardly revenge.

“What--what if it’s a lie?”

“Then, Mrs. Failing, it is sickening of you. There is no other word.
Sickening. I am sorry--a nobody like myself--to speak like this. How
COULD you, oh, how could you demean yourself? Why, not even a poor
person--Her indignation was fine and genuine. But her tears fell no
longer. Nothing menaced her if they were not really brothers.

“It is not a lie, my clear; sit down. I will swear so much solemnly. It
is not a lie, but--”

Agnes waited.

“--we can call it a lie if we choose.”

“I am not so childish. You have said it, and we must all suffer. You
have had your fun: I conclude you did it for fun. You cannot go
back. He--” She pointed towards the stables, and could not finish her
sentence.

“I have not been a fool twice.”

Agnes did not understand.

“My dense lady, can’t you follow? I have not told Stephen one single
word, neither before nor now.”

There was a long silence.

Indeed, Mrs. Failing was in an awkward position.

Rickie had irritated her, and, in her desire to shock him, she had
imperilled her own peace. She had felt so unconventional upon the
hillside, when she loosed the horror against him; but now it was
darting at her as well. Suppose the scandal came out. Stephen, who was
absolutely without delicacy, would tell it to the people as soon as tell
them the time. His paganism would be too assertive; it might even be in
bad taste. After all, she had a prominent position in the neighbourhood;
she was talked about, respected, looked up to. After all, she was
growing old. And therefore, though she had no true regard for Rickie,
nor for Agnes, nor for Stephen, nor for Stephen’s parents, in whose
tragedy she had assisted, yet she did feel that if the scandal revived
it would disturb the harmony of Cadover, and therefore tried to retrace
her steps. It is easy to say shocking things: it is so different to be
connected with anything shocking. Life and death were not involved, but
comfort and discomfort were.

The silence was broken by the sound of feet on the gravel. Agnes said
hastily, “Is that really true--that he knows nothing?”

“You, Rickie, and I are the only people alive that know. He realizes
what he is--with a precision that is sometimes alarming. Who he is, he
doesn’t know and doesn’t care. I suppose he would know when I’m dead.
There are papers.”

“Aunt Emily, before he comes, may I say to you I’m sorry I was so rude?”

Mrs. Failing had not disliked her courage. “My dear, you may. We’re all
off our hinges this Sunday. Sit down by me again.”

Agnes obeyed, and they awaited the arrival of Stephen. They were clever
enough to understand each other. The thing must be hushed up. The matron
must repair the consequences of her petulance. The girl must hide the
stain in her future husband’s family. Why not? Who was injured? What
does a grown-up man want with a grown brother? Rickie upstairs, how
grateful he would be to them for saving him.

“Stephen!”

“Yes.”

“I’m tired of you. Go and bathe in the sea.”

“All right.”

And the whole thing was settled. She liked no fuss, and so did he. He
sat down on the step to tighten his bootlaces. Then he would be ready.
Mrs. Failing laid two or three sovereigns on the step above him. Agnes
tried to make conversation, and said, with averted eyes, that the sea
was a long way off.

“The sea’s downhill. That’s all I know about it.” He swept up the money
with a word of pleasure: he was kept like a baby in such things. Then he
started off, but slowly, for he meant to walk till the morning.

“He will be gone days,” said Mrs. Failing. “The comedy is finished. Let
us come in.”

She went to her room. The storm that she had raised had shattered
her. Yet, because it was stilled for a moment, she resumed her old
emancipated manner, and spoke of it as a comedy.

As for Miss Pembroke, she pretended to be emancipated no longer. People
like “Stephen Wonham” were social thunderbolts, to be shunned at all
costs, or at almost all costs. Her joy was now unfeigned, and she
hurried upstairs to impart it to Rickie.

“I don’t think we are rewarded if we do right, but we are punished if
we lie. It’s the fashion to laugh at poetic justice, but I do believe
in half of it. Cast bitter bread upon the waters, and after many days it
really will come back to you.” These were the words of Mr. Failing. They
were also the opinions of Stewart Ansell, another unpractical person.
Rickie was trying to write to him when she entered with the good news.

“Dear, we’re saved! He doesn’t know, and he never is to know. I can’t
tell you how glad I am. All the time we saw them standing together up
there, she wasn’t telling him at all. She was keeping him out of the
way, in case you let it out. Oh, I like her! She may be unwise, but she
is nice, really. She said, ‘I’ve been a fool but I haven’t been a fool
twice.’ You must forgive her, Rickie. I’ve forgiven her, and she me; for
at first I was so angry with her. Oh, my darling boy, I am so glad!”

He was shivering all over, and could not reply. At last he said, “Why
hasn’t she told him?”

“Because she has come to her senses.”

“But she can’t behave to people like that. She must tell him.”

“Because he must be told such a real thing.”

“Such a real thing?” the girl echoed, screwing up her forehead.
“But--but you don’t mean you’re glad about it?”

His head bowed over the letter. “My God--no! But it’s a real thing. She
must tell him. I nearly told him myself--up there--when he made me look
at the ground, but you happened to prevent me.”

How Providence had watched over them!

“She won’t tell him. I know that much.”

“Then, Agnes, darling”--he drew her to the table “we must talk together
a little. If she won’t, then we ought to.”

“WE tell him?” cried the girl, white with horror. “Tell him now, when
everything has been comfortably arranged?”

“You see, darling”--he took hold of her hand--“what one must do is to
think the thing out and settle what’s right, I’m still all trembling and
stupid. I see it mixed up with other things. I want you to help me.
It seems to me that here and there in life we meet with a person or
incident that is symbolical. It’s nothing in itself, yet for the moment
it stands for some eternal principle. We accept it, at whatever costs,
and we have accepted life. But if we are frightened and reject it, the
moment, so to speak, passes; the symbol is never offered again. Is this
nonsense? Once before a symbol was offered to me--I shall not tell you
how; but I did accept it, and cherished it through much anxiety and
repulsion, and in the end I am rewarded. There will be no reward this
time. I think, from such a man--the son of such a man. But I want to do
what is right.”

“Because doing right is its own reward,” said Agnes anxiously.

“I do not think that. I have seen few examples of it. Doing right is
simply doing right.”

“I think that all you say is wonderfully clever; but since you ask me,
it IS nonsense, dear Rickie, absolutely.”

“Thank you,” he said humbly, and began to stroke her hand. “But all my
disgust; my indignation with my father, my love for--” He broke off; he
could not bear to mention the name of his mother. “I was trying to say,
I oughtn’t to follow these impulses too much. There are others things.
Truth. Our duty to acknowledge each man accurately, however vile he
is. And apart from ideals” (here she had won the battle), “and leaving
ideals aside, I couldn’t meet him and keep silent. It isn’t in me. I
should blurt it out.”

“But you won’t meet him!” she cried. “It’s all been arranged. We’ve
sent him to the sea. Isn’t it splendid? He’s gone. My own boy won’t
be fantastic, will he?” Then she fought the fantasy on its own ground.
“And, bye the bye, what you call the ‘symbolic moment’ is over. You had
it up by the Rings. You tried to tell him, I interrupted you. It’s not
your fault. You did all you could.”

She thought this excellent logic, and was surprised that he looked so
gloomy. “So he’s gone to the sea. For the present that does settle it.
Has Aunt Emily talked about him yet?”

“No. Ask her tomorrow if you wish to know. Ask her kindly. It would be
so dreadful if you did not part friends, and--”

“What’s that?”

It was Stephen calling up from the drive. He had come back. Agnes threw
out her hand in despair.

“Elliot!” the voice called.

They were facing each other, silent and motionless. Then Rickie advanced
to the window. The girl darted in front of him. He thought he had never
seen her so beautiful. She was stopping his advance quite frankly, with
widespread arms.

“Elliot!”

He moved forward--into what? He pretended to himself he would rather see
his brother before he answered; that it was easier to acknowledge him
thus. But at the back of his soul he knew that the woman had conquered,
and that he was moving forward to acknowledge her. “If he calls me
again--” he thought.

“Elliot!”

“Well, if he calls me once again, I will answer him, vile as he is.”

He did not call again.

Stephen had really come back for some tobacco, but as he passed under
the windows he thought of the poor fellow who had been “nipped” (nothing
serious, said Mrs. Failing), and determined to shout good-bye to him.
And once or twice, as he followed the river into the darkness, he
wondered what it was like to be so weak,--not to ride, not to swim, not
to care for anything but books and a girl.

They embraced passionately. The danger had brought them very near to
each other. They both needed a home to confront the menacing tumultuous
world. And what weary years of work, of waiting, lay between them and
that home! Still holding her fast, he said, “I was writing to Ansell
when you came in.”

“Do you owe him a letter?”

“No.” He paused. “I was writing to tell him about this. He would help
us. He always picks out the important point.”

“Darling, I don’t like to say anything, and I know that Mr. Ansell
would keep a secret, but haven’t we picked out the important point for
ourselves?”

He released her and tore the letter up.



XV

The sense of purity is a puzzling and at times a fearful thing. It seems
so noble, and it starts as one with morality. But it is a dangerous
guide, and can lead us away not only from what is gracious, but also
from what is good. Agnes, in this tangle, had followed it blindly,
partly because she was a woman, and it meant more to her than it
can ever mean to a man; partly because, though dangerous, it is also
obvious, and makes no demand upon the intellect. She could not feel that
Stephen had full human rights. He was illicit, abnormal, worse than a
man diseased. And Rickie remembering whose son he was, gradually adopted
her opinion. He, too, came to be glad that his brother had passed from
him untried, that the symbolic moment had been rejected. Stephen was the
fruit of sin; therefore he was sinful, He, too, became a sexual snob.

And now he must hear the unsavoury details. That evening they sat in the
walled garden. Agues, according to arrangement, left him alone with his
aunt. He asked her, and was not answered.

“You are shocked,” she said in a hard, mocking voice, “It is very nice
of you to be shocked, and I do not wish to grieve you further. We will
not allude to it again. Let us all go on just as we are. The comedy is
finished.”

He could not tolerate this. His nerves were shattered, and all that was
good in him revolted as well. To the horror of Agnes, who was within
earshot, he replied, “You used to puzzle me, Aunt Emily, but I
understand you at last. You have forgotten what other people are like.
Continual selfishness leads to that. I am sure of it. I see now how you
look at the world. ‘Nice of me to be shocked!’ I want to go tomorrow, if
I may.”

“Certainly, dear. The morning trains are the best.” And so the
disastrous visit ended.

As he walked back to the house he met a certain poor woman, whose child
Stephen had rescued at the level-crossing, and who had decided, after
some delay, that she must thank the kind gentleman in person. “He has
got some brute courage,” thought Rickie, “and it was decent of him not
to boast about it.” But he had labelled the boy as “Bad,” and it was
convenient to revert to his good qualities as seldom as possible. He
preferred to brood over his coarseness, his caddish ingratitude, his
irreligion. Out of these he constructed a repulsive figure, forgetting
how slovenly his own perceptions had been during the past week, how
dogmatic and intolerant his attitude to all that was not Love.

During the packing he was obliged to go up to the attic to find the
Dryad manuscript which had never been returned. Leighton came too, and
for about half an hour they hunted in the flickering light of a candle.
It was a strange, ghostly place, and Rickie was quite startled when a
picture swung towards him, and he saw the Demeter of Cnidus, shimmering
and grey. Leighton suggested the roof. Mr. Stephen sometimes left
things on the roof. So they climbed out of the skylight--the night was
perfectly still--and continued the search among the gables. Enormous
stars hung overhead, and the roof was bounded by chasms, impenetrable
and black. “It doesn’t matter,” said Rickie, suddenly convinced of the
futility of all that he did. “Oh, let us look properly,” said Leighton,
a kindly, pliable man, who had tried to shirk coming, but who was
genuinely sympathetic now that he had come. They were rewarded: the
manuscript lay in a gutter, charred and smudged.

The rest of the year was spent by Rickie partly in bed,--he had a
curious breakdown,--partly in the attempt to get his little stories
published. He had written eight or nine, and hoped they would make up
a book, and that the book might be called “Pan Pipes.” He was very
energetic over this; he liked to work, for some imperceptible bloom had
passed from the world, and he no longer found such acute pleasure in
people. Mrs. Failing’s old publishers, to whom the book was submitted,
replied that, greatly as they found themselves interested, they did not
see their way to making an offer at present. They were very polite, and
singled out for special praise “Andante Pastorale,” which Rickie had
thought too sentimental, but which Agnes had persuaded him to include.
The stories were sent to another publisher, who considered them for six
weeks, and then returned them. A fragment of red cotton, Placed by Agnes
between the leaves, had not shifted its position.

“Can’t you try something longer, Rickie?” she said; “I believe we’re on
the wrong track. Try an out--and--out love-story.”

“My notion just now,” he replied, “is to leave the passions on the
fringe.” She nodded, and tapped for the waiter: they had met in a
London restaurant. “I can’t soar; I can only indicate. That’s where
the musicians have the pull, for music has wings, and when she says
‘Tristan’ and he says ‘Isolde,’ you are on the heights at once. What do
people mean when they call love music artificial?”

“I know what they mean, though I can’t exactly explain. Or couldn’t
you make your stories more obvious? I don’t see any harm in that. Uncle
Willie floundered hopelessly. He doesn’t read much, and he got muddled.
I had to explain, and then he was delighted. Of course, to write down to
the public would be quite another thing and horrible. You have certain
ideas, and you must express them. But couldn’t you express them more
clearly?”

“You see--” He got no further than “you see.”

“The soul and the body. The soul’s what matters,” said Agnes, and tapped
for the waiter again. He looked at her admiringly, but felt that she was
not a perfect critic. Perhaps she was too perfect to be a critic. Actual
life might seem to her so real that she could not detect the union of
shadow and adamant that men call poetry. He would even go further and
acknowledge that she was not as clever as himself--and he was stupid
enough! She did not like discussing anything or reading solid books, and
she was a little angry with such women as did. It pleased him to make
these concessions, for they touched nothing in her that he valued. He
looked round the restaurant, which was in Soho and decided that she was
incomparable.

“At half-past two I call on the editor of the ‘Holborn.’ He’s got a
stray story to look at, and he’s written about it.”

“Oh, Rickie! Rickie! Why didn’t you put on a boiled shirt!”

He laughed, and teased her. “‘The soul’s what matters. We literary
people don’t care about dress.”

“Well, you ought to care. And I believe you do. Can’t you change?”

“Too far.” He had rooms in South Kensington. “And I’ve forgot my
card-case. There’s for you!”

She shook her head. “Naughty, naughty boy! Whatever will you do?”

“Send in my name, or ask for a bit of paper and write it. Hullo! that’s
Tilliard!”

Tilliard blushed, partly on account of the faux pas he had made last
June, partly on account of the restaurant. He explained how he came to
be pigging in Soho: it was so frightfully convenient and so frightfully
cheap.

“Just why Rickie brings me,” said Miss Pembroke.

“And I suppose you’re here to study life?” said Tilliard, sitting down.

“I don’t know,” said Rickie, gazing round at the waiters and the guests.

“Doesn’t one want to see a good deal of life for writing? There’s life
of a sort in Soho,--Un peu de faisan, s’il vows plait.”

Agnes also grabbed at the waiter, and paid. She always did the paying,
Rickie muddled with his purse.

“I’m cramming,” pursued Tilliard, “and so naturally I come into contact
with very little at present. But later on I hope to see things.” He
blushed a little, for he was talking for Rickie’s edification. “It is
most frightfully important not to get a narrow or academic outlook,
don’t you think? A person like Ansell, who goes from Cambridge,
home--home, Cambridge--it must tell on him in time.”

“But Mr. Ansell is a philosopher.”

“A very kinky one,” said Tilliard abruptly. “Not my idea of a
philosopher. How goes his dissertation?”

“He never answers my letters,” replied Rickie. “He never would. I’ve
heard nothing since June.”

“It’s a pity he sends in this year. There are so many good people in.
He’d have afar better chance if he waited.”

“So I said, but he wouldn’t wait. He’s so keen about this particular
subject.”

“What is it?” asked Agnes.

“About things being real, wasn’t it, Tilliard?”

“That’s near enough.”

“Well, good luck to him!” said the girl. “And good luck to you, Mr.
Tilliard! Later on, I hope, we’ll meet again.”

They parted. Tilliard liked her, though he did not feel that she was
quite in his couche sociale. His sister, for instance, would never have
been lured into a Soho restaurant--except for the experience of the
thing. Tilliard’s couche sociale permitted experiences. Provided his
heart did not go out to the poor and the unorthodox, he might stare at
them as much as he liked. It was seeing life.

Agnes put her lover safely into an omnibus at Cambridge Circus. She
shouted after him that his tie was rising over his collar, but he
did not hear her. For a moment she felt depressed, and pictured quite
accurately the effect that his appearance would have on the editor. The
editor was a tall neat man of forty, slow of speech, slow of soul, and
extraordinarily kind. He and Rickie sat over a fire, with an enormous
table behind them whereon stood many books waiting to be reviewed.

“I’m sorry,” he said, and paused.

Rickie smiled feebly.

“Your story does not convince.” He tapped it. “I have read it with very
great pleasure. It convinces in parts, but it does not convince as a
whole; and stories, don’t you think, ought to convince as a whole?”

“They ought indeed,” said Rickie, and plunged into self-depreciation.
But the editor checked him.

“No--no. Please don’t talk like that. I can’t bear to hear any one talk
against imagination. There are countless openings for imagination,--for
the mysterious, for the supernatural, for all the things you are trying
to do, and which, I hope, you will succeed in doing. I’m not OBJECTING
to imagination; on the contrary, I’d advise you to cultivate it, to
accent it. Write a really good ghost story and we’d take it at once.
Or”--he suggested it as an alternative to imagination--“or you might get
inside life. It’s worth doing.”

“Life?” echoed Rickie anxiously.

He looked round the pleasant room, as if life might be fluttering there
like an imprisoned bird. Then he looked at the editor: perhaps he was
sitting inside life at this very moment. “See life, Mr. Elliot, and then
send us another story.” He held out his hand. “I am sorry I have to say
‘No, thank you’; it’s so much nicer to say, ‘Yes, please.’” He laid his
hand on the young man’s sleeve, and added, “Well, the interview’s not
been so alarming after all, has it?”

“I don’t think that either of us is a very alarming person,” was not
Rickie’s reply. It was what he thought out afterwards in the omnibus.
His reply was “Ow,” delivered with a slight giggle.

As he rumbled westward, his face was drawn, and his eyes moved quickly
to the right and left, as if he would discover something in the squalid
fashionable streets some bird on the wing, some radiant archway, the
face of some god beneath a beaver hat. He loved, he was loved, he had
seen death and other things; but the heart of all things was hidden.
There was a password and he could not learn it, nor could the kind
editor of the “Holborn” teach him. He sighed, and then sighed more
piteously. For had he not known the password once--known it and
forgotten it already? But at this point his fortunes become intimately
connected with those of Mr. Pembroke.




PART 2 -- SAWSTON


XVI

In three years Mr. Pembroke had done much to solidify the day-boys
at Sawston School. If they were not solid, they were at all events
curdling, and his activities might reasonably turn elsewhere. He had
served the school for many years, and it was really time he should be
entrusted with a boarding-house. The headmaster, an impulsive man who
darted about like a minnow and gave his mother a great deal of trouble,
agreed with him, and also agreed with Mrs. Jackson when she said that
Mr. Jackson had served the school for many years and that it was really
time he should be entrusted with a boarding-house. Consequently, when
Dunwood House fell vacant the headmaster found himself in rather a
difficult position.

Dunwood House was the largest and most lucrative of the boarding-houses.
It stood almost opposite the school buildings. Originally it had been
a villa residence--a red-brick villa, covered with creepers and crowned
with terracotta dragons. Mr. Annison, founder of its glory, had lived
here, and had had one or two boys to live with him. Times changed. The
fame of the bishops blazed brighter, the school increased, the one or
two boys became a dozen, and an addition was made to Dunwood House that
more than doubled its size. A huge new building, replete with every
convenience, was stuck on to its right flank. Dormitories, cubicles,
studies, a preparation-room, a dining-room, parquet floors, hot-air
pipes--no expense was spared, and the twelve boys roamed over it like
princes. Baize doors communicated on every floor with Mr. Annison’s
part, and he, an anxious gentleman, would stroll backwards and forwards,
a little depressed at the hygienic splendours, and conscious of some
vanished intimacy. Somehow he had known his boys better when they had
all muddled together as one family, and algebras lay strewn upon the
drawing room chairs. As the house filled, his interest in it decreased.
When he retired--which he did the same summer that Rickie left
Cambridge--it had already passed the summit of excellence and was
beginning to decline. Its numbers were still satisfactory, and for a
little time it would subsist on its past reputation. But that mysterious
asset the tone had lowered, and it was therefore of great importance
that Mr. Annison’s successor should be a first-class man. Mr. Coates,
who came next in seniority, was passed over, and rightly. The choice lay
between Mr. Pembroke and Mr. Jackson, the one an organizer, the other a
humanist. Mr. Jackson was master of the Sixth, and--with the exception
of the headmaster, who was too busy to impart knowledge--the only
first-class intellect in the school. But he could not or rather would
not, keep order. He told his form that if it chose to listen to him it
would learn; if it didn’t, it wouldn’t. One half listened. The other
half made paper frogs, and bored holes in the raised map of Italy with
their penknives. When the penknives gritted he punished them with undue
severity, and then forgot to make them show the punishments up. Yet out
of this chaos two facts emerged. Half the boys got scholarships at
the University, and some of them--including several of the paper-frog
sort--remained friends with him throughout their lives. Moreover, he was
rich, and had a competent wife. His claim to Dunwood House was stronger
than one would have supposed.

The qualifications of Mr. Pembroke have already been indicated. They
prevailed--but under conditions. If things went wrong, he must promise
to resign.

“In the first place,” said the headmaster, “you are doing so splendidly
with the day-boys. Your attitude towards the parents is magnificent.
I--don’t know how to replace you there. Whereas, of course, the parents
of a boarder--”

“Of course,” said Mr. Pembroke.

The parent of a boarder, who only had to remove his son if he was
discontented with the school, was naturally in a more independent
position than the parent who had brought all his goods and chattels to
Sawston, and was renting a house there.

“Now the parents of boarders--this is my second point--practically
demand that the house-master should have a wife.”

“A most unreasonable demand,” said Mr. Pembroke.

“To my mind also a bright motherly matron is quite sufficient. But that
is what they demand. And that is why--do you see?--we HAVE to regard
your appointment as experimental. Possibly Miss Pembroke will be able
to help you. Or I don’t know whether if ever--” He left the sentence
unfinished. Two days later Mr. Pembroke proposed to Mrs. Orr.

He had always intended to marry when he could afford it; and once he
had been in love, violently in love, but had laid the passion aside, and
told it to wait till a more convenient season. This was, of course, the
proper thing to do, and prudence should have been rewarded. But when,
after the lapse of fifteen years, he went, as it were, to his spiritual
larder and took down Love from the top shelf to offer him to Mrs. Orr,
he was rather dismayed. Something had happened. Perhaps the god had
flown; perhaps he had been eaten by the rats. At all events, he was not
there.

Mr. Pembroke was conscientious and romantic, and knew that marriage
without love is intolerable. On the other hand, he could not admit
that love had vanished from him. To admit this, would argue that he had
deteriorated.

Whereas he knew for a fact that he had improved, year by year. Each year
be grew more moral, more efficient, more learned, more genial. So how
could he fail to be more loving? He did not speak to himself as follows,
because he never spoke to himself; but the following notions moved in
the recesses of his mind: “It is not the fire of youth. But I am not
sure that I approve of the fire of youth. Look at my sister! Once she
has suffered, twice she has been most imprudent, and put me to great
inconvenience besides, for if she was stopping with me she would have
done the housekeeping. I rather suspect that it is a nobler, riper
emotion that I am laying at the feet of Mrs. Orr.” It never took him
long to get muddled, or to reverse cause and effect. In a short time he
believed that he had been pining for years, and only waiting for this
good fortune to ask the lady to share it with him.

Mrs. Orr was quiet, clever, kindly, capable, and amusing and they were
old acquaintances. Altogether it was not surprising that he should ask
her to be his wife, nor very surprising that she should refuse. But
she refused with a violence that alarmed them both. He left her house
declaring that he had been insulted, and she, as soon as he left, passed
from disgust into tears.

He was much annoyed. There was a certain Miss Herriton who, though far
inferior to Mrs. Orr, would have done instead of her. But now it was
impossible. He could not go offering himself about Sawston. Having
engaged a matron who had the reputation for being bright and motherly,
he moved into Dunwood House and opened the Michaelmas term. Everything
went wrong. The cook left; the boys had a disease called roseola; Agnes,
who was still drunk with her engagement, was of no assistance, but kept
flying up to London to push Rickie’s fortunes; and, to crown everything,
the matron was too bright and not motherly enough: she neglected the
little boys and was overattentive to the big ones. She left abruptly,
and the voice of Mrs. Jackson arose, prophesying disaster.

Should he avert it by taking orders? Parents do not demand that a
house-master should be a clergyman, yet it reassures them when he is.
And he would have to take orders some time, if he hoped for a school
of his own. His religious convictions were ready to hand, but he spent
several uncomfortable days hunting up his religious enthusiasms. It
was not unlike his attempt to marry Mrs. Orr. But his piety was more
genuine, and this time he never came to the point. His sense of decency
forbade him hurrying into a Church that he reverenced. Moreover, he
thought of another solution: Agnes must marry Rickie in the Christmas
holidays, and they must come, both of them, to Sawston, she as
housekeeper, he as assistant-master. The girl was a good worker when
once she was settled down; and as for Rickie, he could easily be fitted
in somewhere in the school. He was not a good classic, but good enough
to take the Lower Fifth. He was no athlete, but boys might profitably
note that he was a perfect gentleman all the same. He had no experience,
but he would gain it. He had no decision, but he could simulate it.
“Above all,” thought Mr. Pembroke, “it will be something regular for
him to do.” Of course this was not “above all.” Dunwood House held that
position. But Mr. Pembroke soon came to think that it was, and believed
that he was planning for Rickie, just as he had believed he was pining
for Mrs. Orr.

Agnes, when she got back from the lunch in Soho, was told of the plan.
She refused to give any opinion until she had seen her lover. A telegram
was sent to him, and next morning he arrived. He was very susceptible to
the weather, and perhaps it was unfortunate that the morning was foggy.
His train had been stopped outside Sawston Station, and there he had
sat for half an hour, listening to the unreal noises that came from the
line, and watching the shadowy figures that worked there. The gas was
alight in the great drawing-room, and in its depressing rays he and
Agnes greeted each other, and discussed the most momentous question of
their lives. They wanted to be married: there was no doubt of that.
They wanted it, both of them, dreadfully. But should they marry on these
terms?

“I’d never thought of such a thing, you see. When the scholastic
agencies sent me circulars after the Tripos, I tore them up at once.”

“There are the holidays,” said Agnes. “You would have three months in
the year to yourself, and you could do your writing then.”

“But who’ll read what I’ve written?” and he told her about the editor of
the “Holborn.”

She became extremely grave. At the bottom of her heart she had always
mistrusted the little stories, and now people who knew agreed with her.
How could Rickie, or any one, make a living by pretending that Greek
gods were alive, or that young ladies could vanish into trees? A
sparkling society tale, full of verve and pathos, would have been
another thing, and the editor might have been convinced by it.

“But what does he mean?” Rickie was saying. “What does he mean by life?”

“I know what he means, but I can’t exactly explain. You ought to see
life, Rickie. I think he’s right there. And Mr. Tilliard was right when
he said one oughtn’t to be academic.”

He stood in the twilight that fell from the window, she in the twilight
of the gas. “I wonder what Ansell would say,” he murmured.

“Oh, poor Mr. Ansell!”

He was somewhat surprised. Why was Ansell poor? It was the first time
the epithet had been applied to him.

“But to change the conversation,” said Agnes.

“If we did marry, we might get to Italy at Easter and escape this
horrible fog.”

“Yes. Perhaps there--” Perhaps life would be there. He thought of Renan,
who declares that on the Acropolis at Athens beauty and wisdom do exist,
really exist, as external powers. He did not aspire to beauty or wisdom,
but he prayed to be delivered from the shadow of unreality that had
begun to darken the world. For it was as if some power had pronounced
against him--as if, by some heedless action, he had offended an Olympian
god. Like many another, he wondered whether the god might be appeased by
work--hard uncongenial work. Perhaps he had not worked hard enough,
or had enjoyed his work too much, and for that reason the shadow was
falling.

“--And above all, a schoolmaster has wonderful opportunities for doing
good; one mustn’t forget that.”

To do good! For what other reason are we here? Let us give up our
refined sensations, and our comforts, and our art, if thereby we can
make other people happier and better. The woman he loved had urged him
to do good! With a vehemence that surprised her, he exclaimed, “I’ll do
it.”

“Think it over,” she cautioned, though she was greatly pleased.

“No; I think over things too much.”

The room grew brighter. A boy’s laughter floated in, and it seemed to
him that people were as important and vivid as they had been six months
before. Then he was at Cambridge, idling in the parsley meadows, and
weaving perishable garlands out of flowers. Now he was at Sawston,
preparing to work a beneficent machine. No man works for nothing, and
Rickie trusted that to him also benefits might accrue; that his wound
might heal as he laboured, and his eyes recapture the Holy Grail.



XVII

In practical matters Mr. Pembroke was often a generous man. He offered
Rickie a good salary, and insisted on paying Agnes as well. And as he
housed them for nothing, and as Rickie would also have a salary from the
school, the money question disappeared--if not forever, at all events
for the present.

“I can work you in,” he said. “Leave all that to me, and in a few days
you shall hear from the headmaster. He shall create a vacancy. And once
in, we stand or fall together. I am resolved on that.”

Rickie did not like the idea of being “worked in,” but he was determined
to raise no difficulties. It is so easy to be refined and high-minded
when we have nothing to do. But the active, useful man cannot be equally
particular. Rickie’s programme involved a change in values as well as a
change of occupation.

“Adopt a frankly intellectual attitude,” Mr. Pembroke continued. “I do
not advise you at present even to profess any interest in athletics or
organization. When the headmaster writes, he will probably ask whether
you are an all-round man. Boldly say no. A bold ‘no’ is at times the
best. Take your stand upon classics and general culture.”

Classics! A second in the Tripos. General culture. A smattering of
English Literature, and less than a smattering of French.

“That is how we begin. Then we get you a little post--say that of
librarian. And so on, until you are indispensable.”

Rickie laughed; the headmaster wrote, the reply was satisfactory, and in
due course the new life began.

Sawston was already familiar to him. But he knew it as an amateur, and
under an official gaze it grouped itself afresh. The school, a bland
Gothic building, now showed as a fortress of learning, whose outworks
were the boarding-houses. Those straggling roads were full of the houses
of the parents of the day-boys. These shops were in bounds, those out.
How often had he passed Dunwood House! He had once confused it with its
rival, Cedar View. Now he was to live there--perhaps for many years.
On the left of the entrance a large saffron drawing-room, full of cosy
corners and dumpy chairs: here the parents would be received. On the
right of the entrance a study, which he shared with Herbert: here
the boys would be caned--he hoped not often. In the hall a framed
certificate praising the drains, the bust of Hermes, and a carved
teak monkey holding out a salver. Some of the furniture had come from
Shelthorpe, some had been bought from Mr. Annison, some of it was new.
But throughout he recognized a certain decision of arrangement. Nothing
in the house was accidental, or there merely for its own sake. He
contrasted it with his room at Cambridge, which had been a jumble of
things that he loved dearly and of things that he did not love at all.
Now these also had come to Dunwood House, and had been distributed where
each was seemly--Sir Percival to the drawing-room, the photograph of
Stockholm to the passage, his chair, his inkpot, and the portrait of his
mother to the study. And then he contrasted it with the Ansells’ house,
to which their resolute ill-taste had given unity. He was extremely
sensitive to the inside of a house, holding it an organism that
expressed the thoughts, conscious and subconscious, of its inmates.
He was equally sensitive to places. He would compare Cambridge with
Sawston, and either with a third type of existence, to which, for want
of a better name, he gave the name of “Wiltshire.”

It must not be thought that he is going to waste his time. These
contrasts and comparisons never took him long, and he never indulged
in them until the serious business of the day was over. And, as time
passed, he never indulged in them at all. The school returned at the
end of January, before he had been settled in a week. His health
had improved, but not greatly, and he was nervous at the prospect of
confronting the assembled house. All day long cabs had been driving
up, full of boys in bowler hats too big for them; and Agnes had been
superintending the numbering of the said hats, and the placing of them
in cupboards, since they would not be wanted till the end of the term.
Each boy had, or should have had, a bag, so that he need not unpack his
box till the morrow, One boy had only a brown-paper parcel, tied with
hairy string, and Rickie heard the firm pleasant voice say, “But you’ll
bring a bag next term,” and the submissive, “Yes, Mrs. Elliot,” of the
reply. In the passage he ran against the head boy, who was alarmingly
like an undergraduate. They looked at each other suspiciously, and
parted. Two minutes later he ran into another boy, and then into
another, and began to wonder whether they were doing it on purpose, and
if so, whether he ought to mind. As the day wore on, the noises grew
louder-trampings of feet, breakdowns, jolly little squawks--and
the cubicles were assigned, and the bags unpacked, and the bathing
arrangements posted up, and Herbert kept on saying, “All this is
informal--all this is informal. We shall meet the house at eight
fifteen.”

And so, at eight ten, Rickie put on his cap and gown,--hitherto symbols
of pupilage, now to be symbols of dignity,--the very cap and gown that
Widdrington had so recently hung upon the college fountain. Herbert,
similarly attired, was waiting for him in their private dining-room,
where also sat Agnes, ravenously devouring scrambled eggs. “But you’ll
wear your hoods,” she cried. Herbert considered, and them said she was
quite right. He fetched his white silk, Rickie the fragment of rabbit’s
wool that marks the degree of B.A. Thus attired, they proceeded
through the baize door. They were a little late, and the boys, who
were marshalled in the preparation room, were getting uproarious. One,
forgetting how far his voice carried, shouted, “Cave! Here comes the
Whelk.” And another young devil yelled, “The Whelk’s brought a pet with
him!”

“You mustn’t mind,” said Herbert kindly. “We masters make a point of
never minding nicknames--unless, of course, they are applied openly, in
which case a thousand lines is not too much.” Rickie assented, and they
entered the preparation room just as the prefects had established order.

Here Herbert took his seat on a high-legged chair, while Rickie, like a
queen-consort, sat near him on a chair with somewhat shorter legs. Each
chair had a desk attached to it, and Herbert flung up the lid of his,
and then looked round the preparation room with a quick frown, as if
the contents had surprised him. So impressed was Rickie that he peeped
sideways, but could only see a little blotting-paper in the desk. Then
he noticed that the boys were impressed too. Their chatter ceased. They
attended.

The room was almost full. The prefects, instead of lolling disdainfully
in the back row, were ranged like councillors beneath the central
throne. This was an innovation of Mr. Pembroke’s. Carruthers, the head
boy, sat in the middle, with his arm round Lloyd. It was Lloyd who had
made the matron too bright: he nearly lost his colours in consequence.
These two were grown up. Beside them sat Tewson, a saintly child in
the spectacles, who had risen to this height by reason of his immense
learning. He, like the others, was a school prefect. The house prefects,
an inferior brand, were beyond, and behind came the indistinguishable
many. The faces all looked alike as yet--except the face of one boy, who
was inclined to cry.

“School,” said Mr. Pembroke, slowly closing the lid of the
desk,--“school is the world in miniature.” Then he paused, as a man well
may who has made such a remark. It is not, however, the intention of
this work to quote an opening address. Rickie, at all events, refused to
be critical: Herbert’s experience was far greater than his, and he must
take his tone from him. Nor could any one criticize the exhortations
to be patriotic, athletic, learned, and religious, that flowed like
a four-part fugue from Mr. Pembroke’s mouth. He was a practised
speaker--that is to say, he held his audience’s attention. He told them
that this term, the second of his reign, was THE term for Dunwood House;
that it behooved every boy to labour during it for his house’s honour,
and, through the house, for the honour of the school. Taking a wider
range, he spoke of England, or rather of Great Britain, and of her
continental foes. Portraits of empire-builders hung on the wall, and he
pointed to them. He quoted imperial poets. He showed how patriotism had
broadened since the days of Shakespeare, who, for all his genius, could
only write of his country as--

“This fortress built by nature for herself Against infection and the
hand of war, This hazy breed of men, this little world, This precious
stone set in the silver sea.”

And it seemed that only a short ladder lay between the preparation room
and the Anglo-Saxon hegemony of the globe. Then he paused, and in the
silence came “sob, sob, sob,” from a little boy, who was regretting a
villa in Guildford and his mother’s half acre of garden.

The proceeding terminated with the broader patriotism of the school
anthem, recently composed by the organist. Words and tune were still a
matter for taste, and it was Mr. Pembroke (and he only because he had
the music) who gave the right intonation to

     “Perish each laggard!
     Let it not be said
     That Sawston such within her walls hath bred.”

“Come, come,” he said pleasantly, as they ended with harmonies in the
style of Richard Strauss. “This will never do. We must grapple with the
anthem this term--you’re as tuneful as--as day-boys!”

Hearty laughter, and then the whole house filed past them and shook
hands.

“But how did it impress you?” Herbert asked, as soon as they were back
in their own part. Agnes had provided them with a tray of food: the
meals were still anyhow, and she had to fly at once to see after the
boys.

“I liked the look of them.”

“I meant rather, how did the house impress you as a house?”

“I don’t think I thought,” said Rickie rather nervously. “It is not easy
to catch the spirit of a thing at once. I only saw a roomful of boys.”

“My dear Rickie, don’t be so diffident. You are perfectly right. You
only did see a roomful of boys. As yet there’s nothing else to see. The
house, like the school, lacks tradition. Look at Winchester. Look at
the traditional rivalry between Eton and Harrow. Tradition is of
incalculable importance, if a school is to have any status. Why should
Sawston be without?”

“Yes. Tradition is of incalculable value. And I envy those schools that
have a natural connection with the past. Of course Sawston has a past,
though not of the kind that you quite want. The sons of poor tradesmen
went to it at first. So wouldn’t its traditions be more likely to linger
in the Commercial School?” he concluded nervously.

“You have a great deal to learn--a very great deal. Listen to me. Why
has Sawston no traditions?” His round, rather foolish, face assumed the
expression of a conspirator. Bending over the mutton, he whispered, “I
can tell you why. Owing to the day-boys. How can traditions flourish in
such soil? Picture the day-boy’s life--at home for meals, at home for
preparation, at home for sleep, running home with every fancied wrong.
There are day-boys in your class, and, mark my words, they will give you
ten times as much trouble as the boarders, late, slovenly, stopping away
at the slightest pretext. And then the letters from the parents! ‘Why
has my boy not been moved this term?’ ‘Why has my boy been moved this
term?’ ‘I am a dissenter, and do not wish my boy to subscribe to the
school mission.’ ‘Can you let my boy off early to water the garden?’
Remember that I have been a day-boy house-master, and tried to infuse
some esprit de corps into them. It is practically impossible. They come
as units, and units they remain. Worse. They infect the boarders. Their
pestilential, critical, discontented attitude is spreading over the
school. If I had my own way--”

He stopped somewhat abruptly.

“Was that why you laughed at their singing?”

“Not at all. Not at all. It is not my habit to set one section of the
school against the other.”

After a little they went the rounds. The boys were in bed now.
“Good-night!” called Herbert, standing in the corridor of the cubicles,
and from behind each of the green curtains came the sound of a voice
replying, “Good-night, sir!” “Good-night,” he observed into each
dormitory.

Then he went to the switch in the passage and plunged the whole house
into darkness. Rickie lingered behind him, strangely impressed. In the
morning those boys had been scattered over England, leading their own
lives. Now, for three months, they must change everything--see new
faces, accept new ideals. They, like himself, must enter a beneficent
machine, and learn the value of esprit de corps. Good luck attend
them--good luck and a happy release. For his heart would have them
not in these cubicles and dormitories, but each in his own dear home,
amongst faces and things that he knew.

Next morning, after chapel, he made the acquaintance of his class.
Towards that he felt very differently. Esprit de corps was not expected
of it. It was simply two dozen boys who were gathered together for the
purpose of learning Latin. His duties and difficulties would not lie
here. He was not required to provide it with an atmosphere. The scheme
of work was already mapped out, and he started gaily upon familiar
words--

“Pan, ovium custos, tua si tibi Maenala curae Adsis, O Tegaee, favens.”

“Do you think that beautiful?” he asked, and received the honest answer,
“No, sir; I don’t think I do.” He met Herbert in high spirits in the
quadrangle during the interval. But Herbert thought his enthusiasm
rather amateurish, and cautioned him.

“You must take care they don’t get out of hand. I approve of a lively
teacher, but discipline must be established first.”

“I felt myself a learner, not a teacher. If I’m wrong over a point, or
don’t know, I mean to tell them at once.” Herbert shook his head.

“It’s different if I was really a scholar. But I can’t pose as one, can
I? I know much more than the boys, but I know very little. Surely the
honest thing is to be myself to them. Let them accept or refuse me as
that. That’s the only attitude we shall any of us profit by in the end.”

Mr. Pembroke was silent. Then he observed, “There is, as you say, a
higher attitude and a lower attitude. Yet here, as so often, cannot we
find a golden mean between them?”

“What’s that?” said a dreamy voice. They turned and saw a tall,
spectacled man, who greeted the newcomer kindly, and took hold of his
arm. “What’s that about the golden mean?”

“Mr. Jackson--Mr. Elliot: Mr. Elliot--Mr. Jackson,” said Herbert, who
did not seem quite pleased. “Rickie, have you a moment to spare me?”

But the humanist spoke to the young man about the golden mean and
the pinchbeck mean, adding, “You know the Greeks aren’t broad church
clergymen. They really aren’t, in spite of much conflicting evidence.
Boys will regard Sophocles as a kind of enlightened bishop, and
something tells me that they are wrong.”

“Mr. Jackson is a classical enthusiast,” said Herbert. “He makes the
past live. I want to talk to you about the humdrum present.”

“And I am warning him against the humdrum past. That’s another point,
Mr. Elliot. Impress on your class that many Greeks and most Romans were
frightfully stupid, and if they disbelieve you, read Ctesiphon with
them, or Valerius Flaccus. Whatever is that noise?”

“It comes from your class-room, I think,” snapped the other master.

“So it does. Ah, yes. I expect they are putting your little Tewson into
the waste-paper basket.”

“I always lock my class-room in the interval--”

“Yes?”

“--and carry the key in my pocket.”

“Ah. But, Mr. Elliot, I am a cousin of Widdrington’s. He wrote to me
about you. I am so glad. Will you, first of all, come to supper next
Sunday?”

“I am afraid,” put in Herbert, “that we poor housemasters must deny
ourselves festivities in term time.”

“But mayn’t he come once, just once?”

“May, my dear Jackson! My brother-in-law is not a baby. He decides for
himself.”

Rickie naturally refused. As soon as they were out of hearing, Herbert
said, “This is a little unfortunate. Who is Mr. Widdrington?”

“I knew him at Cambridge.”

“Let me explain how we stand,” he continued, after a pause.

“Jackson is the worst of the reactionaries here, while I--why should I
conceal it?--have thrown in my lot with the party of progress. You will
see how we suffer from him at the masters’ meetings. He has no talent
for organization, and yet he is always inflicting his ideas on others.
It was like his impertinence to dictate to you what authors you should
read, and meanwhile the sixth-form room like a bear-garden, and a school
prefect being put into the waste-paper basket. My good Rickie, there’s
nothing to smile at. How is the school to go on with a man like that?
It would be a case of ‘quick march,’ if it was not for his brilliant
intellect. That’s why I say it’s a little unfortunate. You will have
very little in common, you and he.”

Rickie did not answer. He was very fond of Widdrington, who was a
quaint, sensitive person. And he could not help being attracted by
Mr. Jackson, whose welcome contrasted pleasantly with the official
breeziness of his other colleagues. He wondered, too, whether it is so
very reactionary to contemplate the antique.

“It is true that I vote Conservative,” pursued Mr. Pembroke, apparently
confronting some objector. “But why? Because the Conservatives, rather
than the Liberals, stand for progress. One must not be misled by
catch-words.”

“Didn’t you want to ask me something?”

“Ah, yes. You found a boy in your form called Varden?”

“Varden? Yes; there is.”

“Drop on him heavily. He has broken the statutes of the school. He is
attending as a day-boy. The statutes provide that a boy must reside with
his parents or guardians. He does neither. It must be stopped. You must
tell the headmaster.”

“Where does the boy live?”

“At a certain Mrs. Orr’s, who has no connection with the school of any
kind. It must be stopped. He must either enter a boarding-house or go.”

“But why should I tell?” said Rickie. He remembered the boy, an
unattractive person with protruding ears, “It is the business of his
house-master.”

“House-master--exactly. Here we come back again. Who is now the
day-boys’ house-master? Jackson once again--as if anything was Jackson’s
business! I handed the house back last term in a most flourishing
condition. It has already gone to rack and ruin for the second time. To
return to Varden. I have unearthed a put-up job. Mrs. Jackson and Mrs.
Orr are friends. Do you see? It all works round.”

“I see. It does--or might.”

“The headmaster will never sanction it when it’s put to him plainly.”

“But why should I put it?” said Rickie, twisting the ribbons of his gown
round his fingers.

“Because you’re the boy’s form-master.”

“Is that a reason?”

“Of course it is.”

“I only wondered whether--” He did not like to say that he wondered
whether he need do it his first morning.

“By some means or other you must find out--of course you know already,
but you must find out from the boy. I know--I have it! Where’s his
health certificate?”

“He had forgotten it.”

“Just like them. Well, when he brings it, it will be signed by Mrs. Orr,
and you must look at it and say, ‘Orr--Orr--Mrs. Orr?’ or something to
that effect, and then the whole thing will come naturally out.”

The bell rang, and they went in for the hour of school that concluded
the morning. Varden brought his health certificate--a pompous document
asserting that he had not suffered from roseola or kindred ailments in
the holidays--and for a long time Rickie sat with it before him,
spread open upon his desk. He did not quite like the job. It suggested
intrigue, and he had come to Sawston not to intrigue but to labour.
Doubtless Herbert was right, and Mr. Jackson and Mrs. Orr were wrong.
But why could they not have it out among themselves? Then he thought,
“I am a coward, and that’s why I’m raising these objections,” called the
boy up to him, and it did all come out naturally, more or less. Hitherto
Varden had lived with his mother; but she had left Sawston at Christmas,
and now he would live with Mrs. Orr. “Mr. Jackson, sir, said it would be
all right.”

“Yes, yes,” said Rickie; “quite so.” He remembered Herbert’s dictum:
“Masters must present a united front. If they do not--the deluge.” He
sent the boy back to his seat, and after school took the compromising
health certificate to the headmaster. The headmaster was at that time
easily excited by a breach of the constitution. “Parents or guardians,”
 he reputed--“parents or guardians,” and flew with those words on his
lips to Mr. Jackson. To say that Rickie was a cat’s-paw is to put it too
strongly. Herbert was strictly honourable, and never pushed him into an
illegal or really dangerous position; but there is no doubt that on
this and on many other occasions he had to do things that he would not
otherwise have done. There was always some diplomatic corner that had
to be turned, always something that he had to say or not to say. As the
term wore on he lost his independence--almost without knowing it. He had
much to learn about boys, and he learnt not by direct observation--for
which he believed he was unfitted--but by sedulous imitation of the more
experienced masters. Originally he had intended to be friends with his
pupils, and Mr. Pembroke commended the intention highly; but you cannot
be friends either with boy or man unless you give yourself away in
the process, and Mr. Pembroke did not commend this. He, for “personal
intercourse,” substituted the safer “personal influence,” and gave his
junior hints on the setting of kindly traps, in which the boy does give
himself away and reveals his shy delicate thoughts, while the master,
intact, commends or corrects them. Originally Rickie had meant to help
boys in the anxieties that they undergo when changing into men: at
Cambridge he had numbered this among life’s duties. But here is a
subject in which we must inevitably speak as one human being to another,
not as one who has authority or the shadow of authority, and for this
reason the elder school-master could suggest nothing but a few formulae.
Formulae, like kindly traps, were not in Rickie’s line, so he abandoned
these subjects altogether and confined himself to working hard at what
was easy. In the house he did as Herbert did, and referred all doubtful
subjects to him. In his form, oddly enough, he became a martinet. It
is so much simpler to be severe. He grasped the school regulations,
and insisted on prompt obedience to them. He adopted the doctrine of
collective responsibility. When one boy was late, he punished the whole
form. “I can’t help it,” he would say, as if he was a power of nature.
As a teacher he was rather dull. He curbed his own enthusiasms, finding
that they distracted his attention, and that while he throbbed to the
music of Virgil the boys in the back row were getting unruly. But on the
whole he liked his form work: he knew why he was there, and Herbert did
not overshadow him so completely.

What was amiss with Herbert? He had known that something was amiss,
and had entered into partnership with open eyes. The man was kind and
unselfish; more than that he was truly charitable, and it was a real
pleasure to him to give--pleasure to others. Certainly he might talk too
much about it afterwards; but it was the doing, not the talking, that he
really valued, and benefactors of this sort are not too common. He was,
moreover, diligent and conscientious: his heart was in his work, and
his adherence to the Church of England no mere matter of form. He was
capable of affection: he was usually courteous and tolerant. Then what
was amiss? Why, in spite of all these qualities, should Rickie feel that
there was something wrong with him--nay, that he was wrong as a whole,
and that if the Spirit of Humanity should ever hold a judgment he would
assuredly be classed among the goats? The answer at first sight appeared
a graceless one--it was that Herbert was stupid. Not stupid in the
ordinary sense--he had a business-like brain, and acquired knowledge
easily--but stupid in the important sense: his whole life was coloured
by a contempt of the intellect. That he had a tolerable intellect of his
own was not the point: it is in what we value, not in what we have, that
the test of us resides. Now, Rickie’s intellect was not remarkable. He
came to his worthier results rather by imagination and instinct than by
logic. An argument confused him, and he could with difficulty follow it
even on paper. But he saw in this no reason for satisfaction, and tried
to make such use of his brain as he could, just as a weak athlete might
lovingly exercise his body. Like a weak athlete, too, he loved to watch
the exploits, or rather the efforts, of others--their efforts not so
much to acquire knowledge as to dispel a little of the darkness by which
we and all our acquisitions are surrounded. Cambridge had taught him
this, and he knew, if for no other reason, that his time there had not
been in vain. And Herbert’s contempt for such efforts revolted him. He
saw that for all his fine talk about a spiritual life he had but one
test for things--success: success for the body in this life or for the
soul in the life to come. And for this reason Humanity, and perhaps such
other tribunals as there may be, would assuredly reject him.



XVIII

Meanwhile he was a husband. Perhaps his union should have been
emphasized before. The crown of life had been attained, the vague
yearnings, the misread impulses, had found accomplishment at last. Never
again must he feel lonely, or as one who stands out of the broad highway
of the world and fears, like poor Shelley, to undertake the longest
journey. So he reasoned, and at first took the accomplishment for
granted. But as the term passed he knew that behind the yearning there
remained a yearning, behind the drawn veil a veil that he could not
draw. His wedding had been no mighty landmark: he would often wonder
whether such and such a speech or incident came after it or before.
Since that meeting in the Soho restaurant there had been so much to
do--clothes to buy, presents to thank for, a brief visit to a Training
College, a honeymoon as brief. In such a bustle, what spiritual union
could take place? Surely the dust would settle soon: in Italy, at
Easter, he might perceive the infinities of love. But love had shown him
its infinities already. Neither by marriage nor by any other device can
men insure themselves a vision; and Rickie’s had been granted him three
years before, when he had seen his wife and a dead man clasped in each
other’s arms. She was never to be so real to him again.

She ran about the house looking handsomer than ever. Her cheerful
voice gave orders to the servants. As he sat in the study correcting
compositions, she would dart in and give him a kiss. “Dear girl--” he
would murmur, with a glance at the rings on her hand. The tone of their
marriage life was soon set. It was to be a frank good-fellowship, and
before long he found it difficult to speak in a deeper key.

One evening he made the effort. There had been more beauty than was
usual at Sawston. The air was pure and quiet. Tomorrow the fog might
be here, but today one said, “It is like the country.” Arm in arm they
strolled in the side-garden, stopping at times to notice the crocuses,
or to wonder when the daffodils would flower. Suddenly he tightened his
pressure, and said, “Darling, why don’t you still wear ear-rings?”

“Ear-rings?” She laughed. “My taste has improved, perhaps.”

So after all they never mentioned Gerald’s name. But he hoped it was
still dear to her. He did not want her to forget the greatest moment in
her life. His love desired not ownership but confidence, and to a love
so pure it does not seem terrible to come second.

He valued emotion--not for itself, but because it is the only final path
to intimacy. She, ever robust and practical, always discouraged him.
She was not cold; she would willingly embrace him. But she hated being
upset, and would laugh or thrust him off when his voice grew serious.
In this she reminded him of his mother. But his mother--he had never
concealed it from himself--had glories to which his wife would never
attain: glories that had unfolded against a life of horror--a life even
more horrible than he had guessed. He thought of her often during these
earlier months. Did she bless his union, so different to her own? Did
she love his wife? He tried to speak of her to Agnes, but again she was
reluctant. And perhaps it was this aversion to acknowledge the dead,
whose images alone have immortality, that made her own image somewhat
transient, so that when he left her no mystic influence remained, and
only by an effort could he realize that God had united them forever.

They conversed and differed healthily upon other topics. A rifle corps
was to be formed: she hoped that the boys would have proper uniforms,
instead of shooting in their old clothes, as Mr. Jackson had suggested.
There was Tewson; could nothing be done about him? He would slink away
from the other prefects and go with boys of his own age. There was
Lloyd: he would not learn the school anthem, saying that it hurt his
throat. And above all there was Varden, who, to Rickie’s bewilderment,
was now a member of Dunwood House.

“He had to go somewhere,” said Agnes. “Lucky for his mother that we had
a vacancy.”

“Yes--but when I meet Mrs. Orr--I can’t help feeling ashamed.”

“Oh, Mrs. Orr! Who cares for her? Her teeth are drawn. If she chooses
to insinuate that we planned it, let her. Hers was rank dishonesty. She
attempted to set up a boarding-house.”

Mrs. Orr, who was quite rich, had attempted no such thing. She had taken
the boy out of charity, and without a thought of being unconstitutional.
But in had come this officious “Limpet” and upset the headmaster,
and she was scolded, and Mrs. Varden was scolded, and Mr. Jackson was
scolded, and the boy was scolded and placed with Mr. Pembroke, whom she
revered less than any man in the world. Naturally enough, she considered
it a further attempt of the authorities to snub the day-boys, for whose
advantage the school had been founded. She and Mrs. Jackson discussed
the subject at their tea-parties, and the latter lady was sure that
no good, no good of any kind, would come to Dunwood House from such
ill-gotten plunder.

“We say, ‘Let them talk,’” persisted Rickie, “but I never did like
letting people talk. We are right and they are wrong, but I wish the
thing could have been done more quietly. The headmaster does get so
excited. He has given a gang of foolish people their opportunity. I
don’t like being branded as the day-boy’s foe, when I think how much I
would have given to be a day-boy myself. My father found me a nuisance,
and put me through the mill, and I can never forget it particularly the
evenings.”

“There’s very little bullying here,” said Agnes.

“There was very little bullying at my school. There was simply the
atmosphere of unkindness, which no discipline can dispel. It’s not what
people do to you, but what they mean, that hurts.”

“I don’t understand.”

“Physical pain doesn’t hurt--at least not what I call hurt--if a man
hits you by accident or play. But just a little tap, when you know it
comes from hatred, is too terrible. Boys do hate each other: I remember
it, and see it again. They can make strong isolated friendships, but of
general good-fellowship they haven’t a notion.”

“All I know is there’s very little bullying here.”

“You see, the notion of good-fellowship develops late: you can just see
its beginning here among the prefects: up at Cambridge it flourishes
amazingly. That’s why I pity people who don’t go up to Cambridge: not
because a University is smart, but because those are the magic years,
and--with luck--you see up there what you couldn’t see before and mayn’t
ever see again.

“Aren’t these the magic years?” the lady demanded.

He laughed and hit at her. “I’m getting somewhat involved. But hear me,
O Agnes, for I am practical. I approve of our public schools. Long may
they, flourish. But I do not approve of the boarding-house system. It
isn’t an inevitable adjunct--”

“Good gracious me!” she shrieked. “Have you gone mad?”

“Silence, madam. Don’t betray me to Herbert, or I’ll give us the sack.
But seriously, what is the good of, throwing boys so much together?
Isn’t it building their lives on a wrong basis? They don’t understand
each other. I wish they did, but they don’t. They don’t realize that
human beings are simply marvellous. When they do, the whole of life
changes, and you get the true thing. But don’t pretend you’ve got it
before you have. Patriotism and esprit de corps are all very well, but
masters a little forget that they must grow from sentiment. They cannot
create one. Cannot-cannot--cannot. I never cared a straw for England
until I cared for Englishmen, and boys can’t love the school when they
hate each other. Ladies and gentlemen, I will now conclude my address.
And most of it is copied out of Mr. Ansell.”

The truth is, he was suddenly ashamed. He had been carried away on the
flood of his old emotions. Cambridge and all that it meant had stood
before him passionately clear, and beside it stood his mother and the
sweet family life which nurses up a boy until he can salute his equals.
He was ashamed, for he remembered his new resolution--to work without
criticizing, to throw himself vigorously into the machine, not to mind
if he was pinched now and then by the elaborate wheels.

“Mr. Ansell!” cried his wife, laughing somewhat shrilly. “Aha! Now I
understand. It’s just the kind of thing poor Mr. Ansell would say. Well,
I’m brutal. I believe it does Varden good to have his ears pulled now
and then, and I don’t care whether they pull them in play or not. Boys
ought to rough it, or they never grow up into men, and your mother would
have agreed with me. Oh yes; and you’re all wrong about patriotism. It
can, can, create a sentiment.”

She was unusually precise, and had followed his thoughts with an
attention that was also unusual. He wondered whether she was not right,
and regretted that she proceeded to say, “My dear boy, you mustn’t talk
these heresies inside Dunwood House! You sound just like one of that
reactionary Jackson set, who want to fling the school back a hundred
years and have nothing but day-boys all dressed anyhow.”

“The Jackson set have their points.”

“You’d better join it.”

“The Dunwood House set has its points.” For Rickie suffered from the
Primal Curse, which is not--as the Authorized Version suggests--the
knowledge of good and evil, but the knowledge of good-and-evil.

“Then stick to the Dunwood House set.”

“I do, and shall.” Again he was ashamed. Why would he see the other
side of things? He rebuked his soul, not unsuccessfully, and then they
returned to the subject of Varden.

“I’m certain he suffers,” said he, for she would do nothing but laugh.
“Each boy who passes pulls his ears--very funny, no doubt; but every day
they stick out more and get redder, and this afternoon, when he didn’t
know he was being watched, he was holding his head and moaning. I hate
the look about his eyes.”

“I hate the whole boy. Nasty weedy thing.”

“Well, I’m a nasty weedy thing, if it comes to that.”

“No, you aren’t,” she cried, kissing him. But he led her back to
the subject. Could nothing be suggested? He drew up some new
rules--alterations in the times of going to bed, and so on--the effect
of which would be to provide fewer opportunities for the pulling of
Varden’s ears. The rules were submitted to Herbert, who sympathized
with weakliness more than did his sister, and gave them his careful
consideration. But unfortunately they collided with other rules, and
on a closer examination he found that they also ran contrary to the
fundamentals on which the government of Dunwood House was based. So
nothing was done. Agnes was rather pleased, and took to teasing her
husband about Varden. At last he asked her to stop. He felt uneasy about
the boy--almost superstitious. His first morning’s work had brought
sixty pounds a year to their hotel.



XIX

They did not get to Italy at Easter. Herbert had the offer of some
private pupils, and needed Rickie’s help. It seemed unreasonable
to leave England when money was to be made in it, so they went to
Ilfracombe instead. They spent three weeks among the natural advantages
and unnatural disadvantages of that resort. It was out of the season,
and they encamped in a huge hotel, which took them at a reduction. By a
disastrous chance the Jacksons were down there too, and a good deal of
constrained civility had to pass between the two families. Constrained
it was not in Mr. Jackson’s case. At all times he was ready to talk, and
as long as they kept off the school it was pleasant enough. But he was
very indiscreet, and feminine tact had often to intervene. “Go away,
dear ladies,” he would then observe. “You think you see life because you
see the chasms in it. Yet all the chasms are full of female skeletons.”
 The ladies smiled anxiously. To Rickie he was friendly and even
intimate. They had long talks on the deserted Capstone, while their
wives sat reading in the Winter Garden and Mr. Pembroke kept an eye upon
the tutored youths. “Once I had tutored youths,” said Mr. Jackson,
“but I lost them all by letting them paddle with my nieces. It is so
impossible to remember what is proper.” And sooner or later their talk
gravitated towards his central passion--the Fragments of Sophocles. Some
day (“never,” said Herbert) he would edit them. At present they were
merely in his blood. With the zeal of a scholar and the imagination of
a poet he reconstructed lost dramas--Niobe, Phaedra, Philoctetes against
Troy, whose names, but for an accident, would have thrilled the world.
“Is it worth it?” he cried. “Had we better be planting potatoes?” And
then: “We had; but this is the second best.”

Agnes did not approve of these colloquies. Mr. Jackson was not a
buffoon, but he behaved like one, which is what matters; and from the
Winter Garden she could see people laughing at him, and at her husband,
who got excited too. She hinted once or twice, but no notice was taken,
and at last she said rather sharply, “Now, you’re not to, Rickie. I
won’t have it.”

“He’s a type that suits me. He knows people I know, or would like to
have known. He was a friend of Tony Failing’s. It is so hard to realize
that a man connected with one was great. Uncle Tony seems to have been.
He loved poetry and music and pictures, and everything tempted him to
live in a kind of cultured paradise, with the door shut upon squalor.
But to have more decent people in the world--he sacrificed everything
to that. He would have ‘smashed the whole beauty-shop’ if it would help
him. I really couldn’t go as far as that. I don’t think one need go as
far--pictures might have to be smashed, but not music or poetry; surely
they help--and Jackson doesn’t think so either.”

“Well, I won’t have it, and that’s enough.” She laughed, for her voice
had a little been that of the professional scold. “You see we must hang
together. He’s in the reactionary camp.”

“He doesn’t know it. He doesn’t know that he is in any camp at all.”

“His wife is, which comes to the same.”

“Still, it’s the holidays--” He and Mr. Jackson had drifted apart in
the term, chiefly owing to the affair of Varden. “We were to have the
holidays to ourselves, you know.” And following some line of thought,
he continued, “He cheers one up. He does believe in poetry. Smart,
sentimental books do seem absolutely absurd to him, and gods and fairies
far nearer to reality. He tries to express all modern life in the terms
of Greek mythology, because the Greeks looked very straight at things,
and Demeter or Aphrodite are thinner veils than ‘The survival of the
fittest’, or ‘A marriage has been arranged,’ and other draperies of
modern journalese.”

“And do you know what that means?”

“It means that poetry, not prose, lies at the core.”

“No. I can tell you what it means--balder-dash.”

His mouth fell. She was sweeping away the cobwebs with a vengeance. “I
hope you’re wrong,” he replied, “for those are the lines on which I’ve
been writing, however badly, for the last two years.”

“But you write stories, not poems.”

He looked at his watch. “Lessons again. One never has a moment’s peace.”

“Poor Rickie. You shall have a real holiday in the summer.” And she
called after him to say, “Remember, dear, about Mr. Jackson. Don’t go
talking so much to him.”

Rather arbitrary. Her tone had been a little arbitrary of late. But what
did it matter? Mr. Jackson was not a friend, and he must risk the chance
of offending Widdrington. After the lesson he wrote to Ansell, whom he
had not seen since June, asking him to come down to Ilfracombe, if only
for a day. On reading the letter over, its tone displeased him. It was
quite pathetic: it sounded like a cry from prison. “I can’t send him
such nonsense,” he thought, and wrote again. But phrase it as he would
the letter always suggested that he was unhappy. “What’s wrong?” he
wondered. “I could write anything I wanted to him once.” So he scrawled
“Come!” on a post-card. But even this seemed too serious. The post-card
followed the letters, and Agnes found them all in the waste-paper
basket.

Then she said, “I’ve been thinking--oughtn’t you to ask Mr. Ansell over?
A breath of sea air would do the poor thing good.”

There was no difficulty now. He wrote at once, “My dear Stewart, We both
so much wish you could come over.” But the invitation was refused. A
little uneasy he wrote again, using the dialect of their past intimacy.
The effect of this letter was not pathetic but jaunty, and he felt
a keen regret as soon as it slipped into the box. It was a relief to
receive no reply.

He brooded a good deal over this painful yet intangible episode. Was
the pain all of his own creating? or had it been produced by something
external? And he got the answer that brooding always gives--it was both.
He was morbid, and had been so since his visit to Cadover--quicker to
register discomfort than joy. But, none the less, Ansell was definitely
brutal, and Agnes definitely jealous. Brutality he could understand,
alien as it was to himself. Jealousy, equally alien, was a harder
matter. Let husband and wife be as sun and moon, or as moon and sun.
Shall they therefore not give greeting to the stars? He was willing to
grant that the love that inspired her might be higher than his own. Yet
did it not exclude them both from much that is gracious? That dream of
his when he rode on the Wiltshire expanses--a curious dream: the lark
silent, the earth dissolving. And he awoke from it into a valley full of
men.

She was jealous in many ways--sometimes in an open humorous fashion,
sometimes more subtly, never content till “we” had extended our
patronage, and, if possible, our pity. She began to patronize and pity
Ansell, and most sincerely trusted that he would get his fellowship.
Otherwise what was the poor fellow to do? Ridiculous as it may seem, she
was even jealous of Nature. One day her husband escaped from Ilfracombe
to Morthoe, and came back ecstatic over its fangs of slate, piercing an
oily sea. “Sounds like an hippopotamus,” she said peevishly. And when
they returned to Sawston through the Virgilian counties, she disliked
him looking out of the windows, for all the world as if Nature was some
dangerous woman.

He resumed his duties with a feeling that he had never left them. Again
he confronted the assembled house. This term was again the term; school
still the world in miniature. The music of the four-part fugue entered
into him more deeply, and he began to hum its little phrases. The same
routine, the same diplomacies, the same old sense of only half knowing
boys or men--he returned to it all: and all that changed was the cloud
of unreality, which ever brooded a little more densely than before. He
spoke to his wife about this, he spoke to her about everything, and she
was alarmed, and wanted him to see a doctor. But he explained that it
was nothing of any practical importance, nothing that interfered with
his work or his appetite, nothing more than a feeling that the cow was
not really there. She laughed, and “how is the cow today?” soon passed
into a domestic joke.



XX

Ansell was in his favourite haunt--the reading-room of the British
Museum. In that book-encircled space he always could find peace. He
loved to see the volumes rising tier above tier into the misty dome. He
loved the chairs that glide so noiselessly, and the radiating desks,
and the central area, where the catalogue shelves curve, round the
superintendent’s throne. There he knew that his life was not ignoble. It
was worth while to grow old and dusty seeking for truth though truth is
unattainable, restating questions that have been stated at the beginning
of the world. Failure would await him, but not disillusionment. It was
worth while reading books, and writing a book or two which few would
read, and no one, perhaps, endorse. He was not a hero, and he knew it.
His father and sister, by their steady goodness, had made this life
possible. But, all the same, it was not the life of a spoilt child.

In the next chair to him sat Widdrington, engaged in his historical
research. His desk was edged with enormous volumes, and every few
moments an assistant brought him more. They rose like a wall against
Ansell. Towards the end of the morning a gap was made, and through it
they held the following conversation.

“I’ve been stopping with my cousin at Sawston.”

“M’m.”

“It was quite exciting. The air rang with battle. About two-thirds of
the masters have lost their heads, and are trying to produce a gimcrack
copy of Eton. Last term, you know, with a great deal of puffing and
blowing, they fixed the numbers of the school. This term they want to
create a new boarding-house.”

“They are very welcome.”

“But the more boarding-houses they create, the less room they leave for
day-boys. The local mothers are frantic, and so is my queer cousin.
I never knew him so excited over sub-Hellenic things. There was an
indignation meeting at his house. He is supposed to look after the
day-boys’ interests, but no one thought he would--least of all the
people who gave him the post. The speeches were most eloquent.
They argued that the school was founded for day-boys, and that it’s
intolerable to handicap them. One poor lady cried, ‘Here’s my Harold in
the school, and my Toddie coming on. As likely as not I shall be told
there is no vacancy for him. Then what am I to do? If I go, what’s to
become of Harold; and if I stop, what’s to become of Toddie?’ I must
say I was touched. Family life is more real than national life--at least
I’ve ordered all these books to prove it is--and I fancy that the bust
of Euripides agreed with me, and was sorry for the hot-faced mothers.
Jackson will do what he can. He didn’t quite like to state the
naked truth-which is, that boardinghouses pay. He explained it to me
afterwards: they are the only, future open to a stupid master. It’s easy
enough to be a beak when you’re young and athletic, and can offer the
latest University smattering. The difficulty is to keep your place when
you get old and stiff, and younger smatterers are pushing up behind
you. Crawl into a boarding-house and you’re safe. A master’s life is
frightfully tragic. Jackson’s fairly right himself, because he has got
a first-class intellect. But I met a poor brute who was hired as an
athlete. He has missed his shot at a boarding-house, and there’s nothing
in the world for him to do but to trundle down the hill.”

Ansell yawned.

“I saw Rickie too. Once I dined there.”

Another yawn.

“My cousin thinks Mrs. Elliot one of the most horrible women he has
ever seen. He calls her ‘Medusa in Arcady.’ She’s so pleasant, too. But
certainly it was a very stony meal.”

“What kind of stoniness”

“No one stopped talking for a moment.”

“That’s the real kind,” said Ansell moodily. “The only kind.”

“Well, I,” he continued, “am inclined to compare her to an electric
light. Click! she’s on. Click! she’s off. No waste. No flicker.”

“I wish she’d fuse.”

“She’ll never fuse--unless anything was to happen at the main.”

“What do you mean by the main?” said Ansell, who always pursued a
metaphor relentlessly.

Widdrington did not know what he meant, and suggested that Ansell should
visit Sawston to see whether one could know.

“It is no good me going. I should not find Mrs. Elliot: she has no real
existence.”

“Rickie has.”

“I very much doubt it. I had two letters from Ilfracombe last April,
and I very much doubt that the man who wrote them can exist.” Bending
downwards he began to adorn the manuscript of his dissertation with a
square, and inside that a circle, and inside that another square. It was
his second dissertation: the first had failed.

“I think he exists: he is so unhappy.”

Ansell nodded. “How did you know he was unhappy?”

“Because he was always talking.” After a pause he added, “What clever
young men we are!”

“Aren’t we? I expect we shall get asked in marriage soon. I say,
Widdrington, shall we--?”

“Accept? Of course. It is not young manly to say no.”

“I meant shall we ever do a more tremendous thing,--fuse Mrs. Elliot.”

“No,” said Widdrington promptly. “We shall never do that in all our
lives.” He added, “I think you might go down to Sawston, though.”

“I have already refused or ignored three invitations.”

“So I gathered.”

“What’s the good of it?” said Ansell through his teeth. “I will not put
up with little things. I would rather be rude than to listen to twaddle
from a man I’ve known.

“You might go down to Sawston, just for a night, to see him.”

“I saw him last month--at least, so Tilliard informs me. He says that we
all three lunched together, that Rickie paid, and that the conversation
was most interesting.”

“Well, I contend that he does exist, and that if you go--oh, I can’t be
clever any longer. You really must go, man. I’m certain he’s miserable
and lonely. Dunwood House reeks of commerce and snobbery and all the
things he hated most. He doesn’t do anything. He doesn’t make any
friends. He is so odd, too. In this day-boy row that has just started
he’s gone for my cousin. Would you believe it? Quite spitefully. It made
quite a difficulty when I wanted to dine. It isn’t like him either the
sentiments or the behaviour. I’m sure he’s not himself. Pembroke used to
look after the day-boys, and so he can’t very well take the lead against
them, and perhaps Rickie’s doing his dirty work--and has overdone it, as
decent people generally do. He’s even altering to talk to. Yet he’s not
been married a year. Pembroke and that wife simply run him. I don’t see
why they should, and no more do you; and that’s why I want you to go to
Sawston, if only for one night.”

Ansell shook his head, and looked up at the dome as other men look at
the sky. In it the great arc lamps sputtered and flared, for the month
was again November. Then he lowered his eyes from the cold violet
radiance to the books.

“No, Widdrington; no. We don’t go to see people because they are happy
or unhappy. We go when we can talk to them. I cannot talk to Rickie,
therefore I will not waste my time at Sawston.”

“I think you’re right,” said Widdrington softly. “But we are bloodless
brutes. I wonder whether-If we were different people--something might be
done to save him. That is the curse of being a little intellectual. You
and our sort have always seen too clearly. We stand aside--and meanwhile
he turns into stone. Two philosophic youths repining in the British
Museum! What have we done? What shall we ever do? Just drift and
criticize, while people who know what they want snatch it away from us
and laugh.”

“Perhaps you are that sort. I’m not. When the moment comes I shall hit
out like any ploughboy. Don’t believe those lies about intellectual
people. They’re only written to soothe the majority. Do you suppose,
with the world as it is, that it’s an easy matter to keep quiet? Do
you suppose that I didn’t want to rescue him from that ghastly woman?
Action! Nothing’s easier than action; as fools testify. But I want to
act rightly.”

“The superintendent is looking at us. I must get back to my work.”

“You think this all nonsense,” said Ansell, detaining him. “Please
remember that if I do act, you are bound to help me.”

Widdrington looked a little grave. He was no anarchist. A few plaintive
cries against Mrs. Elliot were all that he prepared to emit.

“There’s no mystery,” continued Ansell. “I haven’t the shadow of a plan
in my head. I know not only Rickie but the whole of his history: you
remember the day near Madingley. Nothing in either helps me: I’m just
watching.”

“But what for?”

“For the Spirit of Life.”

Widdrington was surprised. It was a phrase unknown to their philosophy.
They had trespassed into poetry.

“You can’t fight Medusa with anything else. If you ask me what the
Spirit of Life is, or to what it is attached, I can’t tell you. I only
tell you, watch for it. Myself I’ve found it in books. Some people find
it out of doors or in each other. Never mind. It’s the same spirit, and
I trust myself to know it anywhere, and to use it rightly.”

But at this point the superintendent sent a message.

Widdrington then suggested a stroll in the galleries. It was foggy: they
needed fresh air. He loved and admired his friend, but today he could
not grasp him. The world as Ansell saw it seemed such a fantastic place,
governed by brand-new laws. What more could one do than to see Rickie
as often as possible, to invite his confidence, to offer him spiritual
support? And Mrs. Elliot--what power could “fuse” a respectable woman?

Ansell consented to the stroll, but, as usual, only breathed depression.
The comfort of books deserted him among those marble goddesses and gods.
The eye of an artist finds pleasure in texture and poise, but he could
only think of the vanished incense and deserted temples beside an
unfurrowed sea.

“Let us go,” he said. “I do not like carved stones.”

“You are too particular,” said Widdrington. “You are always expecting
to meet living people. One never does. I am content with the Parthenon
frieze.” And he moved along a few yards of it, while Ansell followed,
conscious only of its pathos.

“There’s Tilliard,” he observed. “Shall we kill him?”

“Please,” said Widdrington, and as he spoke Tilliard joined them. He
brought them news. That morning he had heard from Rickie: Mrs. Elliot
was expecting a child.

“A child?” said Ansell, suddenly bewildered.

“Oh, I forgot,” interposed Widdrington. “My cousin did tell me.”

“You forgot! Well, after all, I forgot that it might be, We are indeed
young men.” He leant against the pedestal of Ilissus and remembered
their talk about the Spirit of Life. In his ignorance of what a child
means he wondered whether the opportunity he sought lay here.

“I am very glad,” said Tilliard, not without intention. “A child will
draw them even closer together. I like to see young people wrapped up in
their child.”

“I suppose I must be getting back to my dissertation,” said Ansell.
He left the Parthenon to pass by the monuments of our more reticent
beliefs--the temple of the Ephesian Artemis, the statue of the Cnidian
Demeter. Honest, he knew that here were powers he could not cope with,
nor, as yet, understand.


XXI

The mists that had gathered round Rickie seemed to be breaking. He had
found light neither in work for which he was unfitted nor in a woman who
had ceased to respect him, and whom he was ceasing to love. Though he
called himself fickle and took all the blame of their marriage on his
own shoulders, there remained in Agnes certain terrible faults of heart
and head, and no self-reproach would diminish them. The glamour of
wedlock had faded; indeed, he saw now that it had faded even before
wedlock, and that during the final months he had shut his eyes and
pretended it was still there. But now the mists were breaking.

That November the supreme event approached. He saw it with Nature’s
eyes. It dawned on him, as on Ansell, that personal love and marriage
only cover one side of the shield, and that on the other is graven the
epic of birth. In the midst of lessons he would grow dreamy, as one who
spies a new symbol for the universe, a fresh circle within the square.
Within the square shall be a circle, within the circle another square,
until the visual eye is baffled. Here is meaning of a kind. His mother
had forgotten herself in him. He would forget himself in his son.

He was at his duties when the news arrived--taking preparation. Boys are
marvellous creatures. Perhaps they will sink below the brutes; perhaps
they will attain to a woman’s tenderness. Though they despised Rickie,
and had suffered under Agnes’s meanness, their one thought this term was
to be gentle and to give no trouble.

“Rickie--one moment--”

His face grew ashen. He followed Herbert into the passage, closing
the door of the preparation room behind him. “Oh, is she safe?” he
whispered.

“Yes, yes,” said Herbert; but there sounded in his answer a sombre
hostile note.

“Our boy?”

“Girl--a girl, dear Rickie; a little daughter. She--she is in many ways
a healthy child. She will live--oh yes.” A flash of horror passed over
his face. He hurried into the preparation room, lifted the lid of his
desk, glanced mechanically at the boys, and came out again.

Mrs. Lewin appeared through the door that led into their own part of the
house.

“Both going on well!” she cried; but her voice also was grave,
exasperated.

“What is it?” he gasped. “It’s something you daren’t tell me.”

“Only this”--stuttered Herbert. “You mustn’t mind when you see--she’s
lame.”

Mrs. Lewin disappeared. “Lame! but not as lame as I am?”

“Oh, my dear boy, worse. Don’t--oh, be a man in this. Come away from the
preparation room. Remember she’ll live--in many ways healthy--only just
this one defect.”

The horror of that week never passed away from him. To the end of his
life he remembered the excuses--the consolations that the child would
live; suffered very little, if at all; would walk with crutches; would
certainly live. God was more merciful. A window was opened too wide on a
draughty day--after a short, painless illness his daughter died. But
the lesson he had learnt so glibly at Cambridge should be heeded now; no
child should ever be born to him again.



XXII

That same term there took place at Dunwood House another event. With
their private tragedy it seemed to have no connection; but in time
Rickie perceived it as a bitter comment. Its developments were
unforeseen and lasting. It was perhaps the most terrible thing he had to
bear.

Varden had now been a boarder for ten months. His health had broken in
the previous term,--partly, it is to be feared, as the result of the
indifferent food--and during the summer holidays he was attacked by a
series of agonizing earaches. His mother, a feeble person, wished to
keep him at home, but Herbert dissuaded her. Soon after the death of the
child there arose at Dunwood House one of those waves of hostility of
which no boy knows the origin nor any master can calculate the course.
Varden had never been popular--there was no reason why he should be--but
he had never been seriously bullied hitherto. One evening nearly the
whole house set on him. The prefects absented themselves, the bigger
boys stood round and the lesser boys, to whom power was delegated, flung
him down, and rubbed his face under the desks, and wrenched at his ears.
The noise penetrated the baize doors, and Herbert swept through and
punished the whole house, including Varden, whom it would not do to
leave out. The poor man was horrified. He approved of a little healthy
roughness, but this was pure brutalization. What had come over his boys?
Were they not gentlemen’s sons? He would not admit that if you herd
together human beings before they can understand each other the great
god Pan is angry, and will in the end evade your regulations and drive
them mad. That night the victim was screaming with pain, and the doctor
next day spoke of an operation. The suspense lasted a whole week.
Comment was made in the local papers, and the reputation not only of the
house but of the school was imperilled. “If only I had known,” repeated
Herbert--“if only I had known I would have arranged it all differently.
He should have had a cubicle.” The boy did not die, but he left Sawston,
never to return.

The day before his departure Rickie sat with him some time, and tried to
talk in a way that was not pedantic. In his own sorrow, which he could
share with no one, least of all with his wife, he was still alive to the
sorrows of others. He still fought against apathy, though he was losing
the battle.

“Don’t lose heart,” he told him. “The world isn’t all going to be like
this. There are temptations and trials, of course, but nothing at all of
the kind you have had here.”

“But school is the world in miniature, is it not, sir?” asked the
boy, hoping to please one master by echoing what had been told him by
another. He was always on the lookout for sympathy--: it was one of the
things that had contributed to his downfall.

“I never noticed that myself. I was unhappy at school, and in the world
people can be very happy.”

Varden sighed and rolled about his eyes. “Are the fellows sorry for what
they did to me?” he asked in an affected voice. “I am sure I forgive
them from the bottom of my heart. We ought to forgive our enemies,
oughtn’t we, sir?”

“But they aren’t your enemies. If you meet in five years’ time you may
find each other splendid fellows.”

The boy would not admit this. He had been reading some revivalistic
literature. “We ought to forgive our enemies,” he repeated; “and however
wicked they are, we ought not to wish them evil. When I was ill, and
death seemed nearest, I had many kind letters on this subject.”

Rickie knew about these “many kind letters.” Varden had induced the
silly nurse to write to people--people of all sorts, people that he
scarcely knew or did not know at all--detailing his misfortune, and
asking for spiritual aid and sympathy.

“I am sorry for them,” he pursued. “I would not like to be like them.”

Rickie sighed. He saw that a year at Dunwood House had produced a
sanctimonious prig. “Don’t think about them, Varden. Think about
anything beautiful--say, music. You like music. Be happy. It’s your
duty. You can’t be good until you’ve had a little happiness. Then
perhaps you will think less about forgiving people and more about loving
them.”

“I love them already, sir.” And Rickie, in desperation, asked if he
might look at the many kind letters.

Permission was gladly given. A neat bundle was produced, and for about
twenty minutes the master perused it, while the invalid kept watch on
his face. Rooks cawed out in the playing-fields, and close under the
window there was the sound of delightful, good-tempered laughter. A boy
is no devil, whatever boys may be. The letters were chilly productions,
somewhat clerical in tone, by whomsoever written. Varden, because he was
ill at the time, had been taken seriously. The writers declared that
his illness was fulfilling some mysterious purpose: suffering engendered
spiritual growth: he was showing signs of this already. They consented
to pray for him, some majestically, others shyly. But they all consented
with one exception, who worded his refusal as follows:--

Dear A.C. Varden,--

I ought to say that I never remember seeing you. I am sorry that you are
ill, and hope you are wrong about it. Why did you not write before, for
I could have helped you then? When they pulled your ear, you ought to
have gone like this (here was a rough sketch). I could not undertake
praying, but would think of you instead, if that would do. I am
twenty-two in April, built rather heavy, ordinary broad face, with eyes,
etc. I write all this because you have mixed me with some one else, for
I am not married, and do not want to be. I cannot think of you always,
but will promise a quarter of an hour daily (say 7.00-7.15 A.M.), and
might come to see you when you are better--that is, if you are a kid,
and you read like one. I have been otter-hunting--

Yours sincerely,

Stephen Wonham



XXIII

Riekie went straight from Varden to his wife, who lay on the sofa in her
bedroom. There was now a wide gulf between them. She, like the world she
had created for him, was unreal.

“Agnes, darling,” he began, stroking her hand, “such an awkward little
thing has happened.”

“What is it, dear? Just wait till I’ve added up this hook.”

She had got over the tragedy: she got over everything.

When she was at leisure he told her. Hitherto they had seldom mentioned
Stephen. He was classed among the unprofitable dead.

She was more sympathetic than he expected. “Dear Rickie,” she murmured
with averted eyes. “How tiresome for you.”

“I wish that Varden had stopped with Mrs. Orr.”

“Well, he leaves us for good tomorrow.”

“Yes, yes. And I made him answer the letter and apologize. They had
never met. It was some confusion with a man in the Church Army, living
at a place called Codford. I asked the nurse. It is all explained.”

“There the matter ends.”

“I suppose so--if matters ever end.”

“If, by ill-luck, the person does call. I will just see him and say that
the boy has gone.”

“You, or I. I have got over all nonsense by this time. He’s absolutely
nothing to me now.” He took up the tradesman’s book and played with it
idly. On its crimson cover was stamped a grotesque sheep. How stale and
stupid their life had become!

“Don’t talk like that, though,” she said uneasily. “Think how disastrous
it would be if you made a slip in speaking to him.”

“Would it? It would have been disastrous once. But I expect, as a matter
of fact, that Aunt Emily has made the slip already.”

His wife was displeased. “You need not talk in that cynical way. I
credit Aunt Emily with better feeling. When I was there she did mention
the matter, but only once. She, and I, and all who have any sense of
decency, know better than to make slips, or to think of making them.”

Agnes kept up what she called “the family connection.” She had been once
alone to Cadover, and also corresponded with Mrs. Failing. She had never
told Rickie anything about her visit nor had he ever asked her. But,
from this moment, the whole subject was reopened.

“Most certainly he knows nothing,” she continued. “Why, he does not even
realize that Varden lives in our house! We are perfectly safe--unless
Aunt Emily were to die. Perhaps then--but we are perfectly safe for the
present.”

“When she did mention the matter, what did she say?”

“We had a long talk,” said Agnes quietly. “She told me nothing
new--nothing new about the past, I mean. But we had a long talk about
the present. I think” and her voice grew displeased again--“that you
have been both wrong and foolish in refusing to make up your quarrel
with Aunt Emily.”

“Wrong and wise, I should say.”

“It isn’t to be expected that she--so much older and so sensitive--can
make the first step. But I know she’d he glad to see you.”

“As far as I can remember that final scene in the garden, I accused her
of ‘forgetting what other people were like.’ She’ll never pardon me for
saying that.”

Agnes was silent. To her the phrase was meaningless. Yet Rickie was
correct: Mrs. Failing had resented it more than anything.

“At all events,” she suggested, “you might go and see her.”

“No, dear. Thank you, no.”

“She is, after all--” She was going to say “your father’s sister,” but
the expression was scarcely a happy one, and she turned it into, “She
is, after all, growing old and lonely.”

“So are we all!” he cried, with a lapse of tone that was now
characteristic in him.

“She oughtn’t to be so isolated from her proper relatives.”

There was a moment’s silence. Still playing with the book, he remarked,
“You forget, she’s got her favourite nephew.”

A bright red flush spread over her cheeks. “What is the matter with you
this afternoon?” she asked. “I should think you’d better go for a walk.”

“Before I go, tell me what is the matter with you.” He also flushed.
“Why do you want me to make it up with my aunt?”

“Because it’s right and proper.”

“So? Or because she is old?”

“I don’t understand,” she retorted. But her eyes dropped. His sudden
suspicion was true: she was legacy hunting.

“Agnes, dear Agnes,” he began with passing tenderness, “how can you
think of such things? You behave like a poor person. We don’t want any
money from Aunt Emily, or from any one else. It isn’t virtue that makes
me say it: we are not tempted in that way: we have as much as we want
already.”

“For the present,” she answered, still looking aside.

“There isn’t any future,” he cried in a gust of despair.

“Rickie, what do you mean?”

What did he mean? He meant that the relations between them were
fixed--that there would never be an influx of interest, nor even of
passion. To the end of life they would go on beating time, and this was
enough for her. She was content with the daily round, the common task,
performed indifferently. But he had dreamt of another helpmate, and of
other things.

“We don’t want money--why, we don’t even spend any on travelling. I’ve
invested all my salary and more. As far as human foresight goes, we
shall never want money.” And his thoughts went out to the tiny grave.
“You spoke of ‘right and proper,’ but the right and proper thing for my
aunt to do is to leave every penny she’s got to Stephen.”

Her lip quivered, and for one moment he thought that she was going to
cry. “What am I to do with you?” she said. “You talk like a person in
poetry.”

“I’ll put it in prose. He’s lived with her for twenty years, and he
ought to be paid for it.”

Poor Agnes! Indeed, what was she to do? The first moment she set foot
in Cadover she had thought, “Oh, here is money. We must try and get it.”
 Being a lady, she never mentioned the thought to her husband, but
she concluded that it would occur to him too. And now, though it had
occurred to him at last, he would not even write his aunt a little note.

He was to try her yet further. While they argued this point he flashed
out with, “I ought to have told him that day when he called up to our
room. There’s where I went wrong first.”

“Rickie!”

“In those days I was sentimental. I minded. For two pins I’d write to
him this afternoon. Why shouldn’t he know he’s my brother? What’s all
this ridiculous mystery?”

She became incoherent.

“But WHY not? A reason why he shouldn’t know.”

“A reason why he SHOULD know,” she retorted. “I never heard such
rubbish! Give me a reason why he should know.”

“Because the lie we acted has ruined our lives.”

She looked in bewilderment at the well-appointed room.

“It’s been like a poison we won’t acknowledge. How many times have you
thought of my brother? I’ve thought of him every day--not in love; don’t
misunderstand; only as a medicine I shirked. Down in what they call
the subconscious self he has been hurting me.” His voice broke. “Oh, my
darling, we acted a lie then, and this letter reminds us of it and gives
us one more chance. I have to say ‘we’ lied. I should be lying again if
I took quite all the blame. Let us ask God’s forgiveness together. Then
let us write, as coldly as you please, to Stephen, and tell him he is my
father’s son.”

Her reply need not be quoted. It was the last time he attempted
intimacy. And the remainder of their conversation, though long and
stormy, is also best forgotten.

Thus the first effect of Varden’s letter was to make them quarrel. They
had not openly disagreed before. In the evening he kissed her and said,
“How absurd I was to get angry about things that happened last year. I
will certainly not write to the person.” She returned the kiss. But he
knew that they had destroyed the habit of reverence, and would quarrel
again. On his rounds he looked in at Varden and asked nonchalantly for
the letter. He carried it off to his room. It was unwise of him, for
his nerves were already unstrung, and the man he had tried to bury was
stirring ominously. In the silence he examined the handwriting till he
felt that a living creature was with him, whereas he, because his child
had died, was dead. He perceived more clearly the cruelty of Nature, to
whom our refinement and piety are but as bubbles, hurrying downwards on
the turbid waters. They break, and the stream continues. His father, as
a final insult, had brought into the world a man unlike all the rest of
them, a man dowered with coarse kindliness and rustic strength, a kind
of cynical ploughboy, against whom their own misery and weakness might
stand more vividly relieved. “Born an Elliot--born a gentleman.” So
the vile phrase ran. But here was an Elliot whose badness was not even
gentlemanly. For that Stephen was bad inherently he never doubted for a
moment and he would have children: he, not Rickie, would contribute to
the stream; he, through his remote posterity, might mingled with the
unknown sea.

Thus musing he lay down to sleep, feeling diseased in body and soul. It
was no wonder that the night was the most terrible he had ever known. He
revisited Cambridge, and his name was a grey ghost over the door. Then
there recurred the voice of a gentle shadowy woman, Mrs. Aberdeen, “It
doesn’t seem hardly right.” Those had been her words, her only complaint
against the mysteries of change and death. She bowed her head and
laboured to make her “gentlemen” comfortable. She was labouring still.
As he lay in bed he asked God to grant him her wisdom; that he might
keep sorrow within due bounds; that he might abstain from extreme hatred
and envy of Stephen. It was seldom that he prayed so definitely, or
ventured to obtrude his private wishes. Religion was to him a service, a
mystic communion with good; not a means of getting what he wanted on the
earth. But tonight, through suffering, he was humbled, and became like
Mrs. Aberdeen. Hour after hour he awaited sleep and tried to endure the
faces that frothed in the gloom--his aunt’s, his father’s, and, worst
of all, the triumphant face of his brother. Once he struck at it, and
awoke, having hurt his hand on the wall. Then he prayed hysterically for
pardon and rest.

Yet again did he awake, and from a more mysterious dream. He heard his
mother crying. She was crying quite distinctly in the darkened room.
He whispered, “Never mind, my darling, never mind,” and a voice echoed,
“Never mind--come away--let them die out--let them die out.” He lit a
candle, and the room was empty. Then, hurrying to the window, he saw
above mean houses the frosty glories of Orion.

Henceforward he deteriorates. Let those who censure him suggest what
he should do. He has lost the work that he loved, his friends, and his
child. He remained conscientious and decent, but the spiritual part of
him proceeded towards ruin.



XXIV

The coming months, though full of degradation and anxiety, were to bring
him nothing so terrible as that night. It was the crisis of this
agony. He was an outcast and a failure. But he was not again forced to
contemplate these facts so clearly. Varden left in the morning, carrying
the fatal letter with him. The whole house was relieved. The good angel
was with the boys again, or else (as Herbert preferred to think) they
had learnt a lesson, and were more humane in consequence. At all events,
the disastrous term concluded quietly.

In the Christmas holidays the two masters made an abortive attempt to
visit Italy, and at Easter there was talk of a cruise in the Aegean.
Herbert actually went, and enjoyed Athens and Delphi. The Elliots paid a
few visits together in England. They returned to Sawston about ten days
before school opened, to find that Widdrington was again stopping
with the Jacksons. Intercourse was painful, for the two families were
scarcely on speaking terms; nor did the triumphant scaffoldings of
the new boarding-house make things easier. (The party of progress had
carried the day.) Widdrington was by nature touchy, but on this occasion
he refused to take offence, and often dropped in to see them. His manner
was friendly but critical. They agreed he was a nuisance. Then Agnes
left, very abruptly, to see Mrs. Failing, and while she was away Rickie
had a little stealthy intercourse.

Her absence, convenient as it was, puzzled him. Mrs. Silt, half goose,
half stormy-petrel, had recently paid a flying visit to Cadover, and
thence had flown, without an invitation, to Sawston. Generally she was
not a welcome guest. On this occasion Agnes had welcomed her, and--so
Rickie thought--had made her promise not to tell him something that she
knew. The ladies had talked mysteriously. “Mr. Silt would be one with
you there,” said Mrs. Silt. Could there be any connection between the
two visits?

Agnes’s letters told him nothing: they never did. She was too clumsy
or too cautious to express herself on paper. A drive to Stonehenge;
an anthem in the Cathedral; Aunt Emily’s love. And when he met her at
Waterloo he learnt nothing (if there was anything to learn) from her
face.

“How did you enjoy yourself?”

“Thoroughly.”

“Were you and she alone?”

“Sometimes. Sometimes other people.”

“Will Uncle Tony’s Essays be published?”

Here she was more communicative. The book was at last in proof. Aunt
Emily had written a charming introduction; but she was so idle, she
never finished things off.

They got into an omnibus for the Army and Navy Stores: she wanted to do
some shopping before going down to Sawston.

“Did you read any of the Essays?”

“Every one. Delightful. Couldn’t put them down. Now and then he spoilt
them by statistics--but you should read his descriptions of Nature. He
agrees with you: says the hills and trees are alive! Aunt Emily called
you his spiritual heir, which I thought nice of her. We both so lamented
that you have stopped writing.” She quoted fragments of the Essays as
they went up in the Stores’ lift.

“What else did you talk about?”

“I’ve told you all my news. Now for yours. Let’s have tea first.”

They sat down in the corridor amid ladies in every stage of
fatigue--haggard ladies, scarlet ladies, ladies with parcels that
twisted from every finger like joints of meat. Gentlemen were scarcer,
but all were of the sub-fashionable type, to which Rickie himself now
belonged.

“I haven’t done anything,” he said feebly. “Ate, read, been rude to
tradespeople, talked to Widdrington. Herbert arrived this morning. He
has brought a most beautiful photograph of the Parthenon.”

“Mr. Widdrington?”

“Yes.”

“What did you talk about?”

She might have heard every word. It was only the feeling of pleasure
that he wished to conceal. Even when we love people, we desire to keep
some corner secret from them, however small: it is a human right: it is
personality. She began to cross-question him, but they were interrupted.
A young lady at an adjacent table suddenly rose and cried, “Yes, it is
you. I thought so from your walk.” It was Maud Ansell.

“Oh, do come and join us!” he cried. “Let me introduce my wife.” Maud
bowed quite stiffly, but Agnes, taking it for ill-breeding, was not
offended.

“Then I will come!” she continued in shrill, pleasant tones, adroitly
poising her tea things on either hand, and transferring them to the
Elliots’ table. “Why haven’t you ever come to us, pray?”

“I think you didn’t ask me!”

“You weren’t to be asked.” She sprawled forward with a wagging finger.
But her eyes had the honesty of her brother’s. “Don’t you remember the
day you left us? Father said, ‘Now, Mr. Elliot--’ Or did he call you
‘Elliot’? How one does forget. Anyhow, father said you weren’t to wait
for an invitation, and you said, ‘No, I won’t.’ Ours is a fair-sized
house,”--she turned somewhat haughtily to Agnes,--“and the second spare
room, on account of a harp that hangs on the wall, is always reserved
for Stewart’s friends.”


“How is Mr. Ansell, your brother?” Maud’s face fell. “Hadn’t you heard?”
 she said in awe-struck tones.

“No.”

“He hasn’t got his fellowship. It’s the second time he’s failed.
That means he will never get one. He will never be a don, nor live in
Cambridge and that, as we had hoped.”

“Oh, poor, poor fellow!” said Mrs. Elliot with a remorse that was
sincere, though her congratulations would not have been. “I am so very
sorry.”

But Maud turned to Rickie. “Mr. Elliot, you might know. Tell me. What is
wrong with Stewart’s philosophy? What ought he to put in, or to alter,
so as to succeed?”

Agnes, who knew better than this, smiled.

“I don’t know,” said Rickie sadly. They were none of them so clever,
after all.

“Hegel,” she continued vindictively. “They say he’s read too much Hegel.
But they never tell him what to read instead. Their own stuffy books,
I suppose. Look here--no, that’s the ‘Windsor.’” After a little groping
she produced a copy of “Mind,” and handed it round as if it was a
geological specimen. “Inside that there’s a paragraph written about
something Stewart’s written about before, and there it says he’s read
too much Hegel, and it seems now that that’s been the trouble all
along.” Her voice trembled. “I call it most unfair, and the fellowship’s
gone to a man who has counted the petals on an anemone.”

Rickie had no inclination to smile.

“I wish Stewart had tried Oxford instead.”

“I don’t wish it!”

“You say that,” she continued hotly, “and then you never come to see
him, though you knew you were not to wait for an invitation.”

“If it comes to that, Miss Ansell,” retorted Rickie, in the laughing
tones that one adopts on such occasions, “Stewart won’t come to me,
though he has had an invitation.”

“Yes,” chimed in Agnes, “we ask Mr. Ansell again and again, and he will
have none of us.”

Maud looked at her with a flashing eye. “My brother is a very peculiar
person, and we ladies can’t understand him. But I know one thing, and
that’s that he has a reason all round for what he does. Look here, I
must be getting on. Waiter! Wai-ai-aiter! Bill, please. Separately, of
course. Call the Army and Navy cheap! I know better!”

“How does the drapery department compare?” said Agnes sweetly.

The girl gave a sharp choking sound, gathered up her parcels, and left
them. Rickie was too much disgusted with his wife to speak.

“Appalling person!” she gasped. “It was naughty of me, but I couldn’t
help it. What a dreadful fate for a clever man! To fail in life
completely, and then to be thrown back on a family like that!”

“Maud is a snob and a Philistine. But, in her case, something emerges.”

She glanced at him, but proceeded in her suavest tones, “Do let us make
one great united attempt to get Mr. Ansell to Sawston.”

“No.”

“What a changeable friend you are! When we were engaged you were always
talking about him.”

“Would you finish your tea, and then we will buy the linoleum for the
cubicles.”

But she returned to the subject again, not only on that day but
throughout the term. Could nothing be done for poor Mr. Ansell? It
seemed that she could not rest until all that he had once held dear was
humiliated. In this she strayed outside her nature: she was unpractical.
And those who stray outside their nature invite disaster. Rickie, goaded
by her, wrote to his friend again. The letter was in all ways unlike
his old self. Ansell did not answer it. But he did write to Mr. Jackson,
with whom he was not acquainted.

“Dear Mr. Jackson,--

“I understand from Widdrington that you have a large house. I would like
to tell you how convenient it would be for me to come and stop in it.
June suits me best.--

“Yours truly,

“Stewart Ansell”


To which Mr. Jackson replied that not only in June but during the whole
year his house was at the disposal of Mr. Ansell and of any one who
resembled him.

But Agnes continued her life, cheerfully beating time. She, too, knew
that her marriage was a failure, and in her spare moments regretted
it. She wished that her husband was handsomer, more successful, more
dictatorial. But she would think, “No, no; one mustn’t grumble. It can’t
be helped.” Ansell was wrong in sup-posing she might ever leave Rickie.
Spiritual apathy prevented her. Nor would she ever be tempted by a
jollier man. Here criticism would willingly alter its tone. For Agnes
also has her tragedy. She belonged to the type--not necessarily an
elevated one--that loves once and once only. Her love for Gerald had
not been a noble passion: no imagination transfigured it. But such as it
was, it sprang to embrace him, and he carried it away with him when he
died. Les amours gui suivrent sont moins involuntaires: by an effort of
the will she had warmed herself for Rickie.

She is not conscious of her tragedy, and therefore only the gods need
weep at it. But it is fair to remember that hitherto she moves as one
from whom the inner life has been withdrawn.



XXV

“I am afraid,” said Agnes, unfolding a letter that she had received in
the morning, “that things go far from satisfactorily at Cadover.”

The three were alone at supper. It was the June of Rickie’s second year
at Sawston.

“Indeed?” said Herbert, who took a friendly interest. “In what way?

“Do you remember us talking of Stephen--Stephen Wonham, who by an odd
coincidence--”

“Yes. Who wrote last year to that miserable failure Varden. I do.”

“It is about him.”

“I did not like the tone of his letter.”

Agnes had made her first move. She waited for her husband to reply to
it. But he, though full of a painful curiosity, would not speak. She
moved again.

“I don’t think, Herbert, that Aunt Emily, much as I like her, is the
kind of person to bring a young man up. At all events the results have
been disastrous this time.”

“What has happened?”

“A tangle of things.” She lowered her voice. “Drink.”

“Dear! Really! Was Mrs. Failing fond of him?”

“She used to be. She let him live at Cadover ever since he was a little
boy. Naturally that cannot continue.”

Rickie never spoke.

“And now he has taken to be violent and rude,” she went on.

“In short, a beggar on horseback. Who is he? Has he got relatives?”

“She has always been both father and mother to him. Now it must all come
to an end. I blame her--and she blames herself--for not being severe
enough. He has grown up without fixed principles. He has always followed
his inclinations, and one knows the result of that.”

Herbert assented. “To me Mrs. Failing’s course is perfectly plain. She
has a certain responsibility. She must pay the youth’s passage to one of
the colonies, start him handsomely in some business, and then break off
all communications.”

“How funny! It is exactly what she is going to do.”

“I shall then consider that she has behaved in a thoroughly honourable
manner.” He held out his plate for gooseberries. “His letter to Varden
was neither helpful nor sympathetic, and, if written at all, it ought
to have been both. I am not in the least surprised to learn that he has
turned out badly. When you write next, would you tell her how sorry I
am?”

“Indeed I will. Two years ago, when she was already a little anxious,
she did so wish you could undertake him.

“I could not alter a grown man.” But in his heart he thought he could,
and smiled at his sister amiably. “Terrible, isn’t it?” he remarked to
Rickie. Rickie, who was trying not to mind anything, assented. And an
onlooker would have supposed them a dispassionate trio, who were sorry
both for Mrs. Failing and for the beggar who would bestride her horses’
backs no longer. A new topic was introduced by the arrival of the
evening post.

Herbert took up all the letters, as he often did.

“Jackson?” he exclaimed. “What does the fellow want?” He read, and his
tone was mollified, “‘Dear Mr. Pembroke,--Could you, Mrs. Elliot, and
Mr. Elliot come to supper with us on Saturday next? I should not merely
be pleased, I should be grateful. My wife is writing formally to Mrs.
Elliot’--(Here, Agnes, take your letter),--but I venture to write as
well, and to add my more uncouth entreaties.’--An olive-branch. It is
time! But (ridiculous person!) does he think that we can leave the House
deserted and all go out pleasuring in term time?--Rickie, a letter for
you.”

“Mine’s the formal invitation,” said Agnes. “How very odd! Mr. Ansell
will be there. Surely we asked him here! Did you know he knew the
Jacksons?”

“This makes refusal very difficult,” said Herbert, who was anxious to
accept. “At all events, Rickie ought to go.”

“I do not want to go,” said Rickie, slowly opening his own letter. “As
Agnes says, Ansell has refused to come to us. I cannot put myself out
for him.”

“Who’s yours from?” she demanded.

“Mrs. Silt,” replied Herbert, who had seen the handwriting. “I trust
she does not want to pay us a visit this term, with the examinations
impending and all the machinery at full pressure. Though, Rickie, you
will have to accept the Jacksons’ invitation.”

“I cannot possibly go. I have been too rude; with Widdrington we always
meet here. I’ll stop with the boys--” His voice caught suddenly. He had
opened Mrs. Silt’s letter.

“The Silts are not ill, I hope?”

“No. But, I say,”--he looked at his wife,--“I do think this is going too
far. Really, Agnes.”

“What has happened?”

“It is going too far,” he repeated. He was nerving himself for another
battle. “I cannot stand this sort of thing. There are limits.”

He laid the letter down. It was Herbert who picked it up, and read:
“Aunt Emily has just written to us. We are so glad that her troubles are
over, in spite of the expense. It never does to live apart from one’s
own relatives so much as she has done up to now. He goes next Saturday
to Canada. What you told her about him just turned the scale. She has
asked us--”

“No, it’s too much,” he interrupted. “What I told her--told her about
him--no, I will have it out at last. Agnes!”

“Yes?” said his wife, raising her eyes from Mrs. Jackson’s formal
invitation.

“It’s you--it’s you. I never mentioned him to her. Why, I’ve never seen
her or written to her since. I accuse you.”

Then Herbert overbore him, and he collapsed. He was asked what he meant.
Why was he so excited? Of what did he accuse his wife. Each time he
spoke more feebly, and before long the brother and sister were laughing
at him. He felt bewildered, like a boy who knows that he is right but
cannot put his case correctly. He repeated, “I’ve never mentioned him to
her. It’s a libel. Never in my life.” And they cried, “My dear Rickie,
what an absurd fuss!” Then his brain cleared. His eye fell on the letter
that his wife had received from his aunt, and he reopened the battle.

“Agnes, give me that letter, if you please.”

“Mrs. Jackson’s?”

“My aunt’s.”

She put her hand on it, and looked at him doubtfully. She saw that she
had failed to bully him.

“My aunt’s letter,” he repeated, rising to his feet and bending over the
table towards her.

“Why, dear?”

“Yes, why indeed?” echoed Herbert. He too had bullied Rickie, but from a
purer motive: he had tried to stamp out a dissension between husband and
wife. It was not the first time he had intervened.

“The letter. For this reason: it will show me what you have done. I
believe you have ruined Stephen. You have worked at it for two years.
You have put words into my mouth to ‘turn the scale’ against him. He
goes to Canada--and all the world thinks it is owing to me. As I said
before--I advise you to stop smiling--you have gone a little too far.”

They were all on their feet now, standing round the little table. Agnes
said nothing, but the fingers of her delicate hand tightened upon the
letter. When her husband snatched at it she resisted, and with the
effect of a harlequinade everything went on the floor--lamb, mint
sauce, gooseberries, lemonade, whisky. At once they were swamped in
domesticities. She rang the bell for the servant, cries arose, dusters
were brought, broken crockery (a wedding present) picked up from the
carpet; while he stood wrathfully at the window, regarding the obscured
sun’s decline.

“I MUST see her letter,” he repeated, when the agitation was over. He
was too angry to be diverted from his purpose. Only slight emotions are
thwarted by an interlude of farce.

“I’ve had enough of this quarrelling,” she retorted. “You know that the
Silts are inaccurate. I think you might have given me the benefit of
the doubt. If you will know--have you forgotten that ride you took with
him?”

“I--” he was again bewildered. “The ride where I dreamt--”

“The ride where you turned back because you could not listen to a
disgraceful poem?”

“I don’t understand.”

“The poem was Aunt Emily. He read it to you and a stray soldier.
Afterwards you told me. You said, ‘Really it is shocking, his
ingratitude. She ought to know about it’ She does know, and I should be
glad of an apology.”

He had said something of the sort in a fit of irritation. Mrs. Silt was
right--he had helped to turn the scale.

“Whatever I said, you knew what I meant. You knew I’d sooner cut my
tongue out than have it used against him. Even then.” He sighed. Had he
ruined his brother? A curious tenderness came over him, and passed when
he remembered his own dead child. “We have ruined him, then. Have you
any objection to ‘we’? We have disinherited him.”

“I decide against you,” interposed Herbert. “I have now heard both
sides of this deplorable affair. You are talking most criminal nonsense.
‘Disinherit!’ Sentimental twaddle. It’s been clear to me from the first
that Mrs. Failing has been imposed upon by the Wonham man, a person with
no legal claim on her, and any one who exposes him performs a public
duty--”

“--And gets money.”

“Money?” He was always uneasy at the word. “Who mentioned money?”

“Just understand me, Herbert, and of what it is that I accuse my wife.”
 Tears came into his eyes. “It is not that I like the Wonham man, or
think that he isn’t a drunkard and worse. He’s too awful in every way.
But he ought to have my aunt’s money, because he’s lived all his life
with her, and is her nephew as much as I am. You see, my father went
wrong.” He stopped, amazed at himself. How easy it had been to say! He
was withering up: the power to care about this stupid secret had died.

When Herbert understood, his first thought was for Dunwood House.

“Why have I never been told?” was his first remark.

“We settled to tell no one,” said Agnes. “Rickie, in his anxiety to
prove me a liar, has broken his promise.”

“I ought to have been told,” said Herbert, his anger increasing. “Had I
known, I could have averted this deplorable scene.”

“Let me conclude it,” said Rickie, again collapsing and leaving the
dining-room. His impulse was to go straight to Cadover and make a
business-like statement of the position to Stephen. Then the man would
be armed, and perhaps fight the two women successfully, But he resisted
the impulse. Why should he help one power of evil against another? Let
them go intertwined to destruction. To enrich his brother would be as
bad as enriching himself. If their aunt’s money ever did come to him,
he would refuse to accept it. That was the easiest and most dignified
course. He troubled himself no longer with justice or pity, and the next
day he asked his wife’s pardon for his behaviour.

In the dining-room the conversation continued. Agnes, without much
difficulty, gained her brother as an ally. She acknowledged that she had
been wrong in not telling him, and he then declared that she had been
right on every other point. She slurred a little over the incident of
her treachery, for Herbert was sometimes clearsighted over details,
though easily muddled in a general survey. Mrs. Failing had had plenty
of direct causes of complaint, and she dwelt on these. She dealt,
too, on the very handsome way in which the young man, “though he knew
nothing, had never asked to know,” was being treated by his aunt.

“‘Handsome’ is the word,” said Herbert. “I hope not indulgently. He does
not deserve indulgence.”

And she knew that he, like herself, could remember money, and that it
lent an acknowledged halo to her cause.

“It is not a savoury subject,” he continued, with sudden stiffness. “I
understand why Rickie is so hysterical. My impulse”--he laid his hand on
her shoulder--“is to abandon it at once. But if I am to be of any use
to you, I must hear it all. There are moments when we must look facts in
the face.”

She did not shrink from the subject as much as he thought, as much as
she herself could have wished. Two years before, it had filled her with
a physical loathing. But by now she had accustomed herself to it.

“I am afraid, Bertie boy, there is nothing else to bear, I have tried to
find out again and again, but Aunt Emily will not tell me. I suppose it
is natural. She wants to shield the Elliot name. She only told us in a
fit of temper; then we all agreed to keep it to ourselves; then Rickie
again mismanaged her, and ever since she has refused to let us know any
details.”

“A most unsatisfactory position.” “So I feel.” She sat down again with
a sigh. Mrs. Failing had been a great trial to her orderly mind. “She is
an odd woman. She is always laughing. She actually finds it amusing that
we know no more.”

“They are an odd family.”

“They are indeed.”

Herbert, with unusual sweetness, bent down and kissed her.

She thanked him.

Their tenderness soon passed. They exchanged it with averted eyes. It
embarrassed them. There are moments for all of us when we seem obliged
to speak in a new unprofitable tongue. One might fancy a seraph, vexed
with our normal language, who touches the pious to blasphemy,
the blasphemous to piety. The seraph passes, and we proceed
unaltered--conscious, however, that we have not been ourselves, and that
we may fail in this function yet again. So Agnes and Herbert, as they
proceeded to discuss the Jackson’s supper-party, had an uneasy memory of
spiritual deserts, spiritual streams.



XXVI

Poor Mr. Ansell was actually sitting in the garden of Dunwood House. It
was Sunday morning. The air was full of roasting beef. The sound of
a manly hymn, taken very fast, floated over the road from the school
chapel. He frowned, for he was reading a book, the Essays of Anthony
Eustace Failing.

He was here on account of this book--at least so he told himself. It had
just been published, and the Jacksons were sure that Mr. Elliot would
have a copy. For a book one may go anywhere. It would not have been
logical to enter Dunwood House for the purpose of seeing Rickie, when
Rickie had not come to supper yesterday to see him. He was at Sawston to
assure himself of his friend’s grave. With quiet eyes he had intended
to view the sods, with unfaltering fingers to inscribe the epitaph. Love
remained. But in high matters he was practical. He knew that it would be
useless to reveal it.

“Morning!” said a voice behind him.

He saw no reason to reply to this superfluous statement, and went on
with his reading.

“Morning!” said the voice again.

As for the Essays, the thought was somewhat old-fashioned, and he picked
many holes in it; nor was he anything but bored by the prospect of the
brotherhood of man. However, Mr. Failing stuck to his guns, such as they
were, and fired from them several good remarks. Very notable was his
distinction between coarseness and vulgarity (coarseness, revealing
something; vulgarity, concealing something), and his avowed preference
for coarseness. Vulgarity, to him, had been the primal curse, the shoddy
reticence that prevents man opening his heart to man, the power
that makes against equality. From it sprang all the things that
he hated--class shibboleths, ladies, lidies, the game laws, the
Conservative party--all the things that accent the divergencies rather
than the similarities in human nature. Whereas coarseness--But at this
point Herbert Pembroke had scrawled with a blue pencil: “Childish. One
reads no further.”

“Morning!” repeated the voice.

Ansell read further, for here was the book of a man who had tried,
however unsuccessfully, to practice what he preached. Mrs. Failing, in
her Introduction, described with delicate irony his difficulties as a
landlord; but she did not record the love in which his name was held.
Nor could her irony touch him when he cried: “Attain the practical
through the unpractical. There is no other road.” Ansell was inclined to
think that the unpractical is its own reward, but he respected those who
attempted to journey beyond it. We must all of us go over the mountains.
There is certainly no other road.

“Nice morning!” said the voice.

It was not a nice morning, so Ansell felt bound to speak. He answered:
“No. Why?” A clod of earth immediately struck him on the back. He turned
round indignantly, for he hated physical rudeness. A square man of ruddy
aspect was pacing the gravel path, his hands deep in his pockets. He was
very angry. Then he saw that the clod of earth nourished a blue lobelia,
and that a wound of corresponding size appeared on the pie-shaped bed.
He was not so angry. “I expect they will mind it,” he reflected. Last
night, at the Jacksons’, Agnes had displayed a brisk pity that made
him wish to wring her neck. Maude had not exaggerated. Mr. Pembroke had
patronized through a sorrowful voice and large round eyes. Till he
met these people he had never been told that his career was a failure.
Apparently it was. They would never have been civil to him if it had
been a success, if they or theirs had anything to fear from him.

In many ways Ansell was a conceited man; but he was never proud of being
right. He had foreseen Rickie’s catastrophe from the first, but derived
from this no consolation. In many ways he was pedantic; but his
pedantry lay close to the vineyards of life--far closer than that fetich
Experience of the innumerable tea-cups. He had a great many facts to
learn, and before he died he learnt a suitable quantity. But he never
forgot that the holiness of the heart’s imagination can alone classify
these facts--can alone decide which is an exception, which an example.
“How unpractical it all is!” That was his comment on Dunwood House.
“How unbusiness-like! They live together without love. They work without
conviction. They seek money without requiring it. They die, and nothing
will have happened, either for themselves or for others.” It is a
comment that the academic mind will often make when first confronted
with the world.

But he was becoming illogical. The clod of earth had disturbed him.
Brushing the dirt off his back, he returned to the book. What a curious
affair was the essay on “Gaps”! Solitude, star-crowned, pacing the
fields of England, has a dialogue with Seclusion. He, poor little man,
lives in the choicest scenery--among rocks, forests, emerald lawns,
azure lakes. To keep people out he has built round his domain a high
wall, on which is graven his motto--“Procul este profani.” But he cannot
enjoy himself. His only pleasure is in mocking the absent Profane. They
are in his mind night and day. Their blemishes and stupidities form the
subject of his great poem, “In the Heart of Nature.” Then Solitude tells
him that so it always will be until he makes a gap in the wall, and
permits his seclusion to be the sport of circumstance. He obeys. The
Profane invade him; but for short intervals they wander elsewhere, and
during those intervals the heart of Nature is revealed to him.

This dialogue had really been suggested to Mr. Failing by a talk with
his brother-in-law. It also touched Ansell. He looked at the man who
had thrown the clod, and was now pacing with obvious youth and impudence
upon the lawn. “Shall I improve my soul at his expense?” he thought. “I
suppose I had better.” In friendly tones he remarked, “Were you waiting
for Mr. Pembroke?”

“No,” said the young man. “Why?”

Ansell, after a moment’s admiration, flung the Essays at him. They hit
him in the back. The next moment he lay on his own back in the lobelia
pie.

“But it hurts!” he gasped, in the tones of a puzzled civilization. “What
you do hurts!” For the young man was nicking him over the shins with the
rim of the book cover. “Little brute-ee--ow!”

“Then say Pax!”

Something revolted in Ansell. Why should he say Pax? Freeing his hand,
he caught the little brute under the chin, and was again knocked into
the lobelias by a blow on the mouth.

“Say Pax!” he repeated, pressing the philosopher’s skull into the mould;
and he added, with an anxiety that was somehow not offensive, “I do
advise you. You’d really better.”

Ansell swallowed a little blood. He tried to move, and he could not.
He looked carefully into the young man’s eyes and into the palm of his
right hand, which at present swung unclenched, and he said “Pax!”

“Shake hands!” said the other, helping him up. There was nothing Ansell
loathed so much as the hearty Britisher; but he shook hands, and they
stared at each other awkwardly. With civil murmurs they picked the
little blue flowers off each other’s clothes. Ansell was trying to
remember why they had quarrelled, and the young man was wondering why he
had not guarded his chin properly. In the distance a hymn swung off--

“Fight the good. Fight with. All thy. Might.”

They would be across from the chapel soon.

“Your book, sir?”

“Thank you, sir--yes.”

“Why!” cried the young man--“why, it’s ‘What We Want’! At least the
binding’s exactly the same.”

“It’s called ‘Essays,’” said Ansell.

“Then that’s it. Mrs. Failing, you see, she wouldn’t call it that,
because three W’s, you see, in a row, she said, are vulgar, and sound
like Tolstoy, if you’ve heard of him.”

Ansell confessed to an acquaintance, and then said, “Do you think ‘What
We Want’ vulgar?” He was not at all interested, but he desired to escape
from the atmosphere of pugilistic courtesy, more painful to him than
blows themselves.

“It IS the same book,” said the other--“same title, same binding.” He
weighed it like a brick in his muddy hands.

“Open it to see if the inside corresponds,” said Ansell, swallowing a
laugh and a little more blood with it.

With a liberal allowance of thumb-marks, he turned the pages over and
read, “‘the rural silence that is not a poet’s luxury but a practical
need for all men.’ Yes, it is the same book.” Smiling pleasantly over
the discovery, he handed it back to the owner.

“And is it true?”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Is it true that rural silence is a practical need?”

“Don’t ask me!”

“Have you ever tried it?”

“What?”

“Rural silence.”

“A field with no noise in it, I suppose you mean. I don’t understand.”

Ansell smiled, but a slight fire in the man’s eye checked him. After
all, this was a person who could knock one down. Moreover, there was no
reason why he should be teased. He had it in him to retort “No. Why?”
 He was not stupid in essentials. He was irritable--in Ansell’s eyes a
frequent sign of grace. Sitting down on the upturned seat, he remarked,
“I like the book in many ways. I don’t think ‘What We Want’ would have
been a vulgar title. But I don’t intend to spoil myself on the chance of
mending the world, which is what the creed amounts to. Nor am I keen on
rural silences.”

“Curse!” he said thoughtfully, sucking at an empty pipe.

“Tobacco?”

“Please.”

“Rickie’s is invariably--filthy.”

“Who says I know Rickie?”

“Well, you know his aunt. It’s a possible link. Be gentle with Rickie.
Don’t knock him down if he doesn’t think it’s a nice morning.”

The other was silent.

“Do you know him well?”

“Kind of.” He was not inclined to talk. The wish to smoke was very
violent in him, and Ansell noticed how he gazed at the wreaths that
ascended from bowl and stem, and how, when the stem was in his mouth,
he bit it. He gave the idea of an animal with just enough soul to
contemplate its own bliss. United with refinement, such a type was
common in Greece. It is not common today, and Ansell was surprised to
find it in a friend of Rickie’s. Rickie, if he could even “kind of know”
 such a creature, must be stirring in his grave.

“Do you know his wife too?”

“Oh yes. In a way I know Agnes. But thank you for this tobacco. Last
night I nearly died. I have no money.”

“Take the whole pouch--do.”

After a moment’s hesitation he did. “Fight the good” had scarcely ended,
so quickly had their intimacy grown.

“I suppose you’re a friend of Rickie’s?”

Ansell was tempted to reply, “I don’t know him at all.” But it seemed
no moment for the severer truths, so he said, “I knew him well at
Cambridge, but I have seen very little of him since.”

“Is it true that his baby was lame?”

“I believe so.”

His teeth closed on his pipe. Chapel was over. The organist was prancing
through the voluntary, and the first ripple of boys had already reached
Dunwood House. In a few minutes the masters would be here too, and
Ansell, who was becoming interested, hurried the conversation forward.

“Have you come far?”

“From Wiltshire. Do you know Wiltshire?” And for the first time there
came into his face the shadow of a sentiment, the passing tribute to
some mystery. “It’s a good country. I live in one of the finest valleys
out of Salisbury Plain. I mean, I lived.”

“Have you been dismissed from Cadover, without a penny in your pocket?”

He was alarmed at this. Such knowledge seemed simply diabolical. Ansell
explained that if his boots were chalky, if his clothes had obviously
been slept in, if he knew Mrs. Failing, if he knew Wiltshire, and if
he could buy no tobacco--then the deduction was possible. “You do just
attend,” he murmured.

The house was filling with boys, and Ansell saw, to his regret, the head
of Agnes over the thuyia hedge that separated the small front garden
from the side lawn where he was sitting. After a few minutes it was
followed by the heads of Rickie and Mr. Pembroke. All the heads were
turned the other way. But they would find his card in the hall, and if
the man had left any message they would find that too. “What are you?”
 he demanded. “Who are you--your name--I don’t care about that. But it
interests me to class people, and up to now I have failed with you.”

“I--” He stopped. Ansell reflected that there are worse answers. “I
really don’t know what I am. Used to think I was something special, but
strikes me now I feel much like other chaps. Used to look down on the
labourers. Used to take for granted I was a gentleman, but really I
don’t know where I do belong.”

“One belongs to the place one sleeps in and to the people one eats
with.”

“As often as not I sleep out of doors and eat by myself, so that doesn’t
get you any further.”

A silence, akin to poetry, invaded Ansell. Was it only a pose to like
this man, or was he really wonderful? He was not romantic, for Romance
is a figure with outstretched hands, yearning for the unattainable.
Certain figures of the Greeks, to whom we continually return, suggested
him a little. One expected nothing of him--no purity of phrase nor
swift edged thought. Yet the conviction grew that he had been back
somewhere--back to some table of the gods, spread in a field where there
is no noise, and that he belonged for ever to the guests with whom he
had eaten. Meanwhile he was simple and frank, and what he could tell he
would tell to any one. He had not the suburban reticence. Ansell asked
him, “Why did Mrs. Failing turn you out of Cadover? I should like to
hear that too.”

“Because she was tired of me. Because, again, I couldn’t keep quiet over
the farm hands. I ask you, is it right?” He became incoherent. Ansell
caught, “And they grow old--they don’t play games--it ends they can’t
play.” An illustration emerged. “Take a kitten--if you fool about with
her, she goes on playing well into a cat.”

“But Mrs. Failing minded no mice being caught.”

“Mice?” said the young man blankly. “What I was going to say is, that
some one was jealous of my being at Cadover. I’ll mention no names, but
I fancy it was Mrs. Silt. I’m sorry for her if it was. Anyhow, she set
Mrs. Failing against me. It came on the top of other things--and out I
went.”

“What did Mrs. Silt, whose name I don’t mention, say?”

He looked guilty. “I don’t know. Easy enough to find something to say.
The point is that she said something. You know, Mr.--I don’t know your
name, mine’s Wonham, but I’m more grateful than I can put it over
this tobacco. I mean, you ought to know there is another side to this
quarrel. It’s wrong, but it’s there.”

Ansell told him not to be uneasy: he lad already guessed that there
might be another side. But he could not make out why Mr. Wonham should
have come straight from the aunt to the nephew. They were now sitting
on the upturned seat. “What We Want,” a good deal shattered, lay between
them.

“On account of above-mentioned reasons, there was a row. I don’t
know--you can guess the style of thing. She wanted to treat me to the
colonies, and had up the parson to talk soft-sawder and make out that
a boundless continent was the place for a lad like me. I said, ‘I can’t
run up to the Rings without getting tired, nor gallop a horse out
of this view without tiring it, so what is the point of a boundless
continent?’ Then I saw that she was frightened of me, and bluffed a bit
more, and in the end I was nipped. She caught me--just like her! when
I had nothing on but flannels, and was coming into the house, having
licked the Cadchurch team. She stood up in the doorway between those
stone pilasters and said, ‘No! Never again!’ and behind her was
Wilbraham, whom I tried to turn out, and the gardener, and poor old
Leighton, who hates being hurt. She said, ‘There’s a hundred pounds for
you at the London bank, and as much more in December. Go!’ I said, ‘Keep
your--money, and tell me whose son I am.’ I didn’t care really. I only
said it on the off-chance of hurting her. Sure enough, she caught on
to the doorhandle (being lame) and said, ‘I can’t--I promised--I don’t
really want to,’ and Wilbraham did stare. Then--she’s very queer--she
burst out laughing, and went for the packet after all, and we heard her
laugh through the window as she got it. She rolled it at me down
the steps, and she says, ‘A leaf out of the eternal comedy for you,
Stephen,’ or something of that sort. I opened it as I walked down the
drive, she laughing always and catching on to the handle of the front
door. Of course it wasn’t comic at all. But down in the village there
were both cricket teams, already a little tight, and the mad plumber
shouting ‘Rights of Man!’ They knew I was turned out. We did have a row,
and kept it up too. They daren’t touch Wilbraham’s windows, but there
isn’t much glass left up at Cadover. When you start, it’s worth going
on, but in the end I had to cut. They subscribed a bob here and a bob
there, and these are Flea Thompson’s Sundays. I sent a line to Leighton
not to forward my own things: I don’t fancy them. They aren’t really
mine.” He did not mention his great symbolic act, performed, it is to be
feared, when he was rather drunk and the friendly policeman was looking
the other way. He had cast all his flannels into the little millpond,
and then waded himself through the dark cold water to the new clothes
on the other side. Some one had flung his pipe and his packet after him.
The packet had fallen short. For this reason it was wet when he handed
it to Ansell, and ink that had been dry for twenty-three years had begun
to run again.

“I wondered if you’re right about the hundred pounds,” said Ansell
gravely. “It is pleasant to be proud, but it is unpleasant to die in the
night through not having any tobacco.”

“But I’m not proud. Look how I’ve taken your pouch! The hundred pounds
was--well, can’t you see yourself, it was quite different? It was, so to
speak, inconvenient for me to take the hundred pounds. Or look again how
I took a shilling from a boy who earns nine bob a-week! Proves pretty
conclusively I’m not proud.”

Ansell saw it was useless to argue. He perceived, beneath the slatternly
use of words, the man, buttoned up in them, just as his body was
buttoned up in a shoddy suit,--and he wondered more than ever that such
a man should know the Elliots. He looked at the face, which was frank,
proud, and beautiful, if truth is beauty. Of mercy or tact such a face
knew little. It might be coarse, but it had in it nothing vulgar or
wantonly cruel. “May I read these papers?” he said.

“Of course. Oh yes; didn’t I say? I’m Rickie’s half-brother, come here
to tell him the news. He doesn’t know. There it is, put shortly for
you. I was saying, though, that I bolted in the dark, slept in the
rifle-butts above Salisbury, the sheds where they keep the cardboard
men, you know, never locked up as they ought to be. I turned the whole
place upside down to teach them.”

“Here is your packet again,” said Ansell. “Thank you. How interesting!”
 He rose from the seat and turned towards Dunwood House. He looked at
the bow-windows, the cheap picturesque gables, the terracotta dragons
clawing a dirty sky. He listened to the clink of plates and to the voice
of Mr. Pembroke taking one of his innumerable roll-calls. He looked at
the bed of lobelias. How interesting! What else was there to say?

“One must be the son of some one,” remarked Stephen. And that was all
he had to say. To him those names on the moistened paper were mere
antiquities. He was neither proud of them nor ashamed. A man must have
parents, or he cannot enter the delightful world. A man, if he has
a brother, may reasonably visit him, for they may have interests in
common. He continued his narrative, how in the night he had heard the
clocks, how at daybreak, instead of entering the city, he had struck
eastward to save money,--while Ansell still looked at the house and
found that all his imagination and knowledge could lead him no farther
than this: how interesting!

“--And what do you think of that for a holy horror?”

“For a what?” said Ansell, his thoughts far away.

“This man I am telling you about, who gave me a lift towards Andover,
who said I was a blot on God’s earth.”

One o’clock struck. It was strange that neither of them had had any
summons from the house.

“He said I ought to be ashamed of myself. He said, ‘I’ll not be the
means of bringing shame to an honest gentleman and lady.’ I told him
not to be a fool. I said I knew what I was about. Rickie and Agnes are
properly educated, which leads people to look at things straight, and
not go screaming about blots. A man like me, with just a little reading
at odd hours--I’ve got so far, and Rickie has been through Cambridge.”

“And Mrs. Elliot?”

“Oh, she won’t mind, and I told the man so; but he kept on saying, ‘I’ll
not be the means of bringing shame to an honest gentleman and lady,’
until I got out of his rotten cart.” His eye watched the man a
Nonconformist, driving away over God’s earth. “I caught the train by
running. I got to Waterloo at--”

Here the parlour-maid fluttered towards them, Would Mr. Wonham come in?
Mrs. Elliot would be glad to see him now.

“Mrs. Elliot?” cried Ansell. “Not Mr. Elliot?”

“It’s all the same,” said Stephen, and moved towards the house.

“You see, I only left my name. They don’t know why I’ve come.”

“Perhaps Mr. Elliot sees me meanwhile?”

The parlour-maid looked blank. Mr. Elliot had not said so. He had been
with Mrs. Elliot and Mr. Pembroke in the study. Now the gentlemen had
gone upstairs.

“All right, I can wait.” After all, Rickie was treating him as he had
treated Rickie, as one in the grave, to whom it is futile to make any
loving motion. Gone upstairs--to brush his hair for dinner! The irony
of the situation appealed to him strongly. It reminded him of the Greek
Drama, where the actors know so little and the spectators so much.

“But, by the bye,” he called after Stephen, “I think I ought to tell
you--don’t--”

“What is it?”

“Don’t--” Then he was silent. He had been tempted to explain everything,
to tell the fellow how things stood, that he must avoid this if he
wanted to attain that; that he must break the news to Rickie gently;
that he must have at least one battle royal with Agnes. But it was
contrary to his own spirit to coach people: he held the human soul to
be a very delicate thing, which can receive eternal damage from a little
patronage. Stephen must go into the house simply as himself, for thus
alone would he remain there.

“I ought to knock my pipe out? Was that it?” “By no means. Go in, your
pipe and you.”

He hesitated, torn between propriety and desire. Then he followed the
parlour-maid into the house smoking. As he entered the dinner-bell rang,
and there was the sound of rushing feet, which died away into shuffling
and silence. Through the window of the boys’ dining-hall came the
colourless voice of Rickie--“‘Benedictus benedicat.’”

Ansell prepared himself to witness the second act of the drama;
forgetting that all this world, and not part of it, is a stage.



XXVII

The parlour-maid took Mr. Wonham to the study. He had been in the
drawing-room before, but had got bored, and so had strolled out into
the garden. Now he was in better spirits, as a man ought to be who has
knocked down a man. As he passed through the hall he sparred at the
teak monkey, and hung his cap on the bust of Hermes. And he greeted Mrs.
Elliot with a pleasant clap of laughter. “Oh, I’ve come with the most
tremendous news!” he cried.

She bowed, but did not shake hands, which rather surprised him. But
he never troubled over “details.” He seldom watched people, and never
thought that they were watching him. Nor could he guess how much it
meant to her that he should enter her presence smoking. Had she not
said once at Cadover, “Oh, please smoke; I love the smell of a pipe”?

“Would you sit down? Exactly there, please.” She placed him at a large
table, opposite an inkpot and a pad of blotting-paper.

“Will you tell your ‘tremendous news’ to me? My brother and my husband
are giving the boys their dinner.”

“Ah!” said Stephen, who had had neither time nor money for breakfast in
London.

“I told them not to wait for me.”

So he came to the point at once. He trusted this handsome woman. His
strength and his youth called to hers, expecting no prudish response.
“It’s very odd. It is that I’m Rickie’s brother. I’ve just found out.
I’ve come to tell you all.”

“Yes?”

He felt in his pocket for the papers. “Half-brother I ought to have
said.”

“Yes?”

“I’m illegitimate. Legally speaking, that is, I’ve been turned out of
Cadover. I haven’t a penny. I--”

“There is no occasion to inflict the details.” Her face, which had been
an even brown, began to flush slowly in the centre of the cheeks. The
colour spread till all that he saw of her was suffused, and she turned
away. He thought he had shocked her, and so did she. Neither knew that
the body can be insincere and express not the emotions we feel but those
that we should like to feel. In reality she was quite calm, and her
dislike of him had nothing emotional in it as yet.

“You see--” he began. He was determined to tell the fidgety story, for
the sooner it was over the sooner they would have something to eat.
Delicacy he lacked, and his sympathies were limited. But such as they
were, they rang true: he put no decorous phantom between him and his
desires.

“I do see. I have seen for two years.” She sat down at the head of the
table, where there was another ink-pot. Into this she dipped a pen. “I
have seen everything, Mr. Wonham--who you are, how you have behaved at
Cadover, how you must have treated Mrs. Failing yesterday; and now”--her
voice became very grave--“I see why you have come here, penniless.
Before you speak, we know what you will say.”

His mouth fell open, and he laughed so merrily that it might have given
her a warning. But she was thinking how to follow up her first success.
“And I thought I was bringing tremendous news!” he cried. “I only
twisted it out of Mrs. Failing last night. And Rickie knows too?”

“We have known for two years.”

“But come, by the bye,--if you’ve known for two years, how is it you
didn’t--” The laugh died out of his eyes. “You aren’t ashamed?” he
asked, half rising from his chair. “You aren’t like the man towards
Andover?”

“Please, please sit down,” said Agnes, in the even tones she used
when speaking to the servants; “let us not discuss side issues. I am a
horribly direct person, Mr. Wonham. I go always straight to the point.”
 She opened a chequebook. “I am afraid I shall shock you. For how much?”

He was not attending.

“There is the paper we suggest you shall sign.” She pushed towards him a
pseudo-legal document, just composed by Herbert.

“In consideration of the sum of..., I agree to perpetual silence--to
restrain from libellous...never to molest the said Frederick Elliot by
intruding--’”

His brain was not quick. He read the document over twice, and he could
still say, “But what’s that cheque for?”

“It is my husband’s. He signed for you as soon as we heard you were
here. We guessed you had come to be silenced. Here is his signature. But
he has left the filling in for me. For how much? I will cross it, shall
I? You will just have started a banking account, if I understand Mrs.
Failing rightly. It is not quite accurate to say you are penniless: I
heard from her just before you returned from your cricket. She allows
you two hundred a-year, I think. But this additional sum--shall I date
the cheque Saturday or for tomorrow?”

At last he found words. Knocking his pipe out on the table, he said
slowly, “Here’s a very bad mistake.”

“It is quite possible,” retorted Agnes. She was glad she had taken the
offensive, instead of waiting till he began his blackmailing, as had
been the advice of Rickie. Aunt Emily had said that very spring, “One’s
only hope with Stephen is to start bullying first.” Here he was, quite
bewildered, smearing the pipe-ashes with his thumb. He asked to read the
document again. “A stamp and all!” he remarked.

They had anticipated that his claim would exceed two pounds.

“I see. All right. It takes a fool a minute. Never mind. I’ve made a bad
mistake.”

“You refuse?” she exclaimed, for he was standing at the door. “Then do
your worst! We defy you!”

“That’s all right, Mrs. Elliot,” he said roughly. “I don’t want a scene
with you, nor yet with your husband. We’ll say no more about it. It’s
all right. I mean no harm.”

“But your signature then! You must sign--you--”

He pushed past her, and said as he reached for his cap, “There, that’s
all right. It’s my mistake. I’m sorry.” He spoke like a farmer who has
failed to sell a sheep. His manner was utterly prosaic, and up to the
last she thought he had not understood her. “But it’s money we offer
you,” she informed him, and then darted back to the study, believing
for one terrible moment that he had picked up the blank cheque. When she
returned to the hall he had gone. He was walking down the road rather
quickly. At the corner he cleared his throat, spat into the gutter, and
disappeared.

“There’s an odd finish,” she thought. She was puzzled, and determined to
recast the interview a little when she related it to Rickie. She had
not succeeded, for the paper was still unsigned. But she had so cowed
Stephen that he would probably rest content with his two hundred a-year,
and never come troubling them again. Clever management, for one knew
him to be rapacious: she had heard tales of him lending to the poor
and exacting repayment to the uttermost farthing. He had also stolen at
school. Moderately triumphant, she hurried into the side-garden: she had
just remembered Ansell: she, not Rickie, had received his card.

“Oh, Mr. Ansell!” she exclaimed, awaking him from some day-dream.
“Haven’t either Rickie or Herbert been out to you? Now, do come into
dinner, to show you aren’t offended. You will find all of us assembled
in the boys’ dining-hall.”

To her annoyance he accepted.

“That is, if the Jacksons are not expecting you.”

The Jacksons did not matter. If he might brush his clothes and bathe his
lip, he would like to come.

“Oh, what has happened to you? And oh, my pretty lobelias!”

He replied, “A momentary contact with reality,” and she, who did not
look for sense in his remarks, hurried away to the dining-hall to
announce him.

The dining-hall was not unlike the preparation room. There was the
same parquet floor, and dado of shiny pitchpine. On its walls also
were imperial portraits, and over the harmonium to which they sang the
evening hymns was spread the Union Jack. Sunday dinner, the most pompous
meal of the week, was in progress. Her brother sat at the head of the
high table, her husband at the head of the second. To each he gave a
reassuring nod and went to her own seat, which was among the junior
boys. The beef was being carried out; she stopped it. “Mr. Ansell
is coming,” she called. “Herbert there is more room by you; sit up
straight, boys.” The boys sat up straight, and a respectful hush spread
over the room.

“Here he is!” called Rickie cheerfully, taking his cue from his wife.
“Oh, this is splendid!” Ansell came in. “I’m so glad you managed this.
I couldn’t leave these wretches last night!” The boys tittered suitably.
The atmosphere seemed normal. Even Herbert, though longing to hear what
had happened to the blackmailer, gave adequate greeting to their guest:
“Come in, Mr. Ansell; come here. Take us as you find us!”

“I understood,” said Stewart, “that I should find you all. Mrs. Elliot
told me I should. On that understanding I came.”

It was at once evident that something had gone wrong.

Ansell looked round the room carefully. Then clearing his throat and
ruffling his hair, he began--“I cannot see the man with whom I have
talked, intimately, for an hour, in your garden.”

The worst of it was they were all so far from him and from each other,
each at the end of a tableful of inquisitive boys. The two masters
looked at Agnes for information, for her reassuring nod had not told
them much. She looked hopelessly back.

“I cannot see this man,” repeated Ansell, who remained by the harmonium
in the midst of astonished waitresses. “Is he to be given no lunch?”

Herbert broke the silence by fresh greetings. Rickie knew that the
contest was lost, and that his friend had sided with the enemy. It was
the kind of thing he would do. One must face the catastrophe quietly
and with dignity. Perhaps Ansell would have turned on his heel, and left
behind him only vague suspicions, if Mrs. Elliot had not tried to talk
him down. “Man,” she cried--“what man? Oh, I know--terrible bore! Did
he get hold of you?”--thus committing their first blunder, and causing
Ansell to say to Rickie, “Have you seen your brother?”

“I have not.”

“Have you been told he was here?”

Rickie’s answer was inaudible.

“Have you been told you have a brother?”

“Let us continue this conversation later.”

“Continue it? My dear man, how can we until you know what I’m talking
about? You must think me mad; but I tell you solemnly that you have a
brother of whom you’ve never heard, and that he was in this house ten
minutes ago.” He paused impressively. “Your wife has happened to see
him first. Being neither serious nor truthful, she is keeping you apart,
telling him some lie and not telling you a word.”

There was a murmur of alarm. One of the prefects rose, and Ansell set
his back to the wall, quite ready for a battle. For two years he had
waited for his opportunity. He would hit out at Mrs. Elliot like
any ploughboy now that it had come. Rickie said: “There is a slight
misunderstanding. I, like my wife, have known what there is to know for
two years”--a dignified rebuff, but their second blunder.

“Exactly,” said Agnes. “Now I think Mr. Ansell had better go.”

“Go?” exploded Ansell. “I’ve everything to say yet. I beg your pardon,
Mrs. Elliot, I am concerned with you no longer. This man”--he turned
to the avenue of faces--“this man who teaches you has a brother. He has
known of him two years and been ashamed. He has--oh--oh--how it fits
together! Rickie, it’s you, not Mrs. Silt, who must have sent tales of
him to your aunt. It’s you who’ve turned him out of Cadover. It’s you
who’ve ordered him to be ruined today.”

Now Herbert arose. “Out of my sight, sir! But have it from me first that
Rickie and his aunt have both behaved most generously. No, no, Agnes,
I’ll not be interrupted. Garbled versions must not get about. If the
Wonham man is not satisfied now, he must be insatiable. He cannot levy
blackmail on us for ever. Sir, I give you two minutes; then you will be
expelled by force.”

“Two minutes!” sang Ansell. “I can say a great deal in that.” He put
one foot on a chair and held his arms over the quivering room. He seemed
transfigured into a Hebrew prophet passionate for satire and the truth.
“Oh, keep quiet for two minutes,” he cried, “and I’ll tell you something
you’ll be glad to hear. You’re a little afraid Stephen may come back.
Don’t be afraid. I bring good news. You’ll never see him nor any one
like him again. I must speak very plainly, for you are all three
fools. I don’t want you to say afterwards, ‘Poor Mr. Ansell tried to be
clever.’ Generally I don’t mind, but I should mind today. Please listen.
Stephen is a bully; he drinks; he knocks one down; but he would sooner
die than take money from people he did not love. Perhaps he will die,
for he has nothing but a few pence that the poor gave him and some
tobacco which, to my eternal glory, he accepted from me. Please listen
again. Why did he come here? Because he thought you would love him, and
was ready to love you. But I tell you, don’t be afraid. He would sooner
die now than say you were his brother. Please listen again--”

“Now, Stewart, don’t go on like that,” said Rickie bitterly. “It’s easy
enough to preach when you are an outsider. You would be more
charitable if such a thing had happened to yourself. Easy enough to be
unconventional when you haven’t suffered and know nothing of the facts.
You love anything out of the way, anything queer, that doesn’t often
happen, and so you get excited over this. It’s useless, my dear man;
you have hurt me, but you will never upset me. As soon as you stop this
ridiculous scene we will finish our dinner. Spread this scandal; add
to it. I’m too old to mind such nonsense. I cannot help my father’s
disgrace, on the one hand; nor, on the other, will I have anything to do
with his blackguard of a son.”

So the secret was given to the world. Agnes might colour at his speech;
Herbert might calculate the effect of it on the entries for Dunwood
House; but he cared for none of these things. Thank God! he was withered
up at last.

“Please listen again,” resumed Ansell. “Please correct two slight
mistakes: firstly, Stephen is one of the greatest people I have ever
met; secondly, he’s not your father’s son. He’s the son of your mother.”

It was Rickie, not Ansell, who was carried from the hall, and it was
Herbert who pronounced the blessing--

“Benedicto benedicatur.”

A profound stillness succeeded the storm, and the boys, slipping away
from their meal, told the news to the rest of the school, or put it in
the letters they were writing home.



XXVIII

The soul has her own currency. She mints her spiritual coinage and
stamps it with the image of some beloved face. With it she pays her
debts, with it she reckons, saying, “This man has worth, this man is
worthless.” And in time she forgets its origin; it seems to her to be a
thing unalterable, divine. But the soul can also have her bankruptcies.

Perhaps she will be the richer in the end. In her agony she learns to
reckon clearly. Fair as the coin may have been, it was not accurate; and
though she knew it not, there were treasures that it could not buy. The
face, however beloved, was mortal, and as liable as the soul herself to
err. We do but shift responsibility by making a standard of the dead.

There is, indeed, another coinage that bears on it not man’s image but
God’s. It is incorruptible, and the soul may trust it safely; it will
serve her beyond the stars. But it cannot give us friends, or the
embrace of a lover, or the touch of children, for with our fellow
mortals it has no concern. It cannot even give the joys we call
trivial--fine weather, the pleasures of meat and drink, bathing and the
hot sand afterwards, running, dreamless sleep. Have we learnt the true
discipline of a bankruptcy if we turn to such coinage as this? Will it
really profit us so much if we save our souls and lose the whole world?




PART 3 -- WILTSHIRE

XXIX

Robert--there is no occasion to mention his surname: he was a young
farmer of some education who tried to coax the aged soil of Wiltshire
scientifically--came to Cadover on business and fell in love with Mrs.
Elliot. She was there on her bridal visit, and he, an obscure nobody,
was received by Mrs. Failing into the house and treated as her social
equal. He was good-looking in a bucolic way, and people sometimes
mistook him for a gentleman until they saw his hands. He discovered
this, and one of the slow, gentle jokes he played on society was to
talk upon some cultured subject with his hands behind his back and then
suddenly reveal them. “Do you go in for boating?” the lady would ask;
and then he explained that those particular weals are made by the
handles of the plough. Upon which she became extremely interested, but
found an early opportunity of talking to some one else.

He played this joke on Mrs. Elliot the first evening, not knowing that
she observed him as he entered the room. He walked heavily, lifting his
feet as if the carpet was furrowed, and he had no evening clothes. Every
one tried to put him at his ease, but she rather suspected that he was
there already, and envied him. They were introduced, and spoke of Byron,
who was still fashionable. Out came his hands--the only rough hands in
the drawing-room, the only hands that had ever worked. She was filled
with some strange approval, and liked him.

After dinner they met again, to speak not of Byron but of manure. The
other people were so clever and so amusing that it relieved her to
listen to a man who told her three times not to buy artificial manure
ready made, but, if she would use it, to make it herself at the last
moment. Because the ammonia evaporated. Here were two packets of powder.
Did they smell? No. Mix them together and pour some coffee--An appalling
smell at once burst forth, and every one began to cough and cry. This
was good for the earth when she felt sour, for he knew when the earth
was ill. He knew, too, when she was hungry he spoke of her tantrums--the
strange unscientific element in her that will baffle the scientist to
the end of time. “Study away, Mrs. Elliot,” he told her; “read all the
books you can get hold of; but when it comes to the point, stroll out
with a pipe in your mouth and do a bit of guessing.” As he talked, the
earth became a living being--or rather a being with a living skin,--and
manure no longer dirty stuff, but a symbol of regeneration and of the
birth of life from life. “So it goes on for ever!” she cried excitedly.
He replied: “Not for ever. In time the fire at the centre will cool, and
nothing can go on then.”

He advanced into love with open eyes, slowly, heavily, just as he had
advanced across the drawing room carpet. But this time the bride did not
observe his tread. She was listening to her husband, and trying not to
be so stupid. When he was close to her--so close that it was difficult
not to take her in his arms--he spoke to Mr. Failing, and was at once
turned out of Cadover.

“I’m sorry,” said Mr. Failing, as he walked down the drive with his hand
on his guest’s shoulder. “I had no notion you were that sort. Any one
who behaves like that has to stop at the farm.”

“Any one?”

“Any one.” He sighed heavily, not for any personal grievance, but
because he saw how unruly, how barbaric, is the soul of man. After all,
this man was more civilized than most.

“Are you angry with me, sir?” He called him “sir,” not because he was
richer or cleverer or smarter, not because he had helped to educate him
and had lent him money, but for a reason more profound--for the reason
that there are gradations in heaven.

“I did think you--that a man like you wouldn’t risk making people
unhappy. My sister-in-law--I don’t say this to stop you loving her;
something else must do that--my sister-in-law, as far as I know, doesn’t
care for you one little bit. If you had said anything, if she had
guessed that a chance person was in--this fearful state, you would
simply--have opened hell. A woman of her sort would have lost all--”

“I knew that.”

Mr. Failing removed his hand. He was displeased.

“But something here,” said Robert incoherently. “This here.” He struck
himself heavily on the heart. “This here, doing something so unusual,
makes it not matter what she loses--I--” After a silence he asked, “Have
I quite followed you, sir, in that business of the brotherhood of man?”

“How do you mean?”

“I thought love was to bring it about.”

“Love of another man’s wife? Sensual love? You have understood
nothing--nothing.” Then he was ashamed, and cried, “I understand nothing
myself.” For he remembered that sensual and spiritual are not easy words
to use; that there are, perhaps, not two Aphrodites, but one Aphrodite
with a Janus face. “I only understand that you must try to forget her.”

“I will not try.”

“Promise me just this, then--not to do anything crooked.”

“I’m straight. No boasting, but I couldn’t do a crooked thing--No, not
if I tried.”

And so appallingly straight was he in after years, that Mr. Failing
wished that he had phrased the promise differently.

Robert simply waited. He told himself that it was hopeless; but
something deeper than himself declared that there was hope. He gave up
drink, and kept himself in all ways clean, for he wanted to be worthy
of her when the time came. Women seemed fond of him, and caused him to
reflect with pleasure, “They do run after me. There must be something in
me. Good. I’d be done for if there wasn’t.” For six years he turned up
the earth of Wiltshire, and read books for the sake of his mind, and
talked to gentlemen for the sake of their patois, and each year he rode
to Cadover to take off his hat to Mrs. Elliot, and, perhaps, to speak
to her about the crops. Mr. Failing was generally present, and it struck
neither man that those dull little visits were so many words out of
which a lonely woman might build sentences. Then Robert went to London
on business. He chanced to see Mr. Elliot with a strange lady. The time
had come.

He became diplomatic, and called at Mr. Elliot’s rooms to find things
out. For if Mrs. Elliot was happier than he could ever make her, he
would withdraw, and love her in renunciation. But if he could make her
happier, he would love her in fulfilment. Mr. Elliot admitted him as a
friend of his brother-in-law’s, and felt very broad-minded as he did
so. Robert, however, was a success. The youngish men there found him
interesting, and liked to shock him with tales of naughty London and
naughtier Paris. They spoke of “experience” and “sensations” and “seeing
life,” and when a smile ploughed over his face, concluded that his
prudery was vanquished. He saw that they were much less vicious than
they supposed: one boy had obviously read his sensations in a book. But
he could pardon vice. What he could not pardon was triviality, and he
hoped that no decent woman could pardon it either. There grew up in him
a cold, steady anger against these silly people who thought it advanced
to be shocking, and who described, as something particularly choice and
educational, things that he had understood and fought against for years.
He inquired after Mrs. Elliot, and a boy tittered. It seemed that she
“did not know,” that she lived in a remote suburb, taking care of a
skinny baby. “I shall call some time or other,” said Robert. “Do,” said
Mr. Elliot, smiling. And next time he saw his wife he congratulated her
on her rustic admirer.

She had suffered terribly. She had asked for bread, and had been given
not even a stone. People talk of hungering for the ideal, but there is
another hunger, quite as divine, for facts. She had asked for facts
and had been given “views,” “emotional standpoints,” “attitudes towards
life.” To a woman who believed that facts are beautiful, that the living
world is beautiful beyond the laws of beauty, that manure is neither
gross nor ludicrous, that a fire, not eternal, glows at the heart of
the earth, it was intolerable to be put off with what the Elliots called
“philosophy,” and, if she refused, to be told that she had no sense of
humour. “Tarrying into the Elliot family.” It had sounded so splendid,
for she was a penniless child with nothing to offer, and the Elliots
held their heads high. For what reason? What had they ever done, except
say sarcastic things, and limp, and be refined? Mr. Failing suffered
too, but she suffered more, inasmuch as Frederick was more impossible
than Emily. He did not like her, he practically lived apart, he was not
even faithful or polite. These were grave faults, but they were human
ones: she could even imagine them in a man she loved. What she could
never love was a dilettante.

Robert brought her an armful of sweet-peas. He laid it on the table,
put his hands behind his back, and kept them there till the end of the
visit. She knew quite well why he had come, and though she also knew
that he would fail, she loved him too much to snub him or to stare in
virtuous indignation. “Why have you come?” she asked gravely, “and why
have you brought me so many flowers?”

“My garden is full of them,” he answered. “Sweetpeas need picking down.
And, generally speaking, flowers are plentiful in July.”

She broke his present into bunches--so much for the drawing-room, so
much for the nursery, so much for the kitchen and her husband’s room:
he would be down for the night. The most beautiful she would keep for
herself. Presently he said, “Your husband is no good. I’ve watched him
for a week. I’m thirty, and not what you call hasty, as I used to be,
or thinking that nothing matters like the French. No. I’m a plain
Britisher, yet--I--I’ve begun wrong end, Mrs. Elliot; I should have said
that I’ve thought chiefly of you for six years, and that though I talk
here so respectfully, if I once unhooked my hands--”

There was a pause. Then she said with great sweetness, “Thank you; I am
glad you love me,” and rang the bell.

“What have you done that for?” he cried.

“Because you must now leave the house, and never enter it again.”

“I don’t go alone,” and he began to get furious.

Her voice was still sweet, but strength lay in it too, as she said,
“You either go now with my thanks and blessing, or else you go with
the police. I am Mrs. Elliot. We need not discuss Mr. Elliot. I am Mrs.
Elliot, and if you make one step towards me I give you in charge.”

But the maid answered the bell not of the drawing-room, but of the front
door. They were joined by Mr. Elliot, who held out his hand with much
urbanity. It was not taken. He looked quickly at his wife, and said, “Am
I de trop?” There was a long silence. At last she said, “Frederick, turn
this man out.”

“My love, why?”

Robert said that he loved her.

“Then I am de trop,” said Mr. Elliot, smoothing out his gloves. He would
give these sodden barbarians a lesson. “My hansom is waiting at the
door. Pray make use of it.”

“Don’t!” she cried, almost affectionately. “Dear Frederick, it isn’t a
play. Just tell this man to go, or send for the police.”

“On the contrary; it is French comedy of the best type. Don’t you agree,
sir, that the police would be an inartistic error?” He was perfectly
calm and collected, whereas they were in a pitiable state.

“Turn him out at once!” she cried. “He has insulted your wife. Save me,
save me!” She clung to her husband and wept. “He was going I had managed
him--he would never have known--” Mr. Elliot repulsed her.

“If you don’t feel inclined to start at once,” he said with easy
civility, “Let us have a little tea. My dear sir, do forgive me for not
shooting you. Nous avons change tout cela. Please don’t look so nervous.
Please do unclasp your hands--”

He was alone.

“That’s all right,” he exclaimed, and strolled to the door. The hansom
was disappearing round the corner. “That’s all right,” he repeated in
more quavering tones as he returned to the drawing-room and saw that it
was littered with sweet-peas. Their colour got on his nerves--magenta,
crimson; magenta, crimson. He tried to pick them up, and they escaped.
He trod them underfoot, and they multiplied and danced in the triumph
of summer like a thousand butterflies. The train had left when he got to
the station. He followed on to London, and there he lost all traces.
At midnight he began to realize that his wife could never belong to him
again.

Mr. Failing had a letter from Stockholm. It was never known what impulse
sent them there. “I am sorry about it all, but it was the only way.”
 The letter censured the law of England, “which obliges us to behave like
this, or else we should never get married. I shall come back to face
things: she will not come back till she is my wife. He must bring an
action soon, or else we shall try one against him. It seems all very
unconventional, but it is not really, it is only a difficult start. We
are not like you or your wife: we want to be just ordinary people, and
make the farm pay, and not be noticed all our lives.”

And they were capable of living as they wanted. The class difference,
which so intrigued Mrs. Failing, meant very little to them. It was
there, but so were other things.

They both cared for work and living in the open, and for not speaking
unless they had got something to say. Their love of beauty, like their
love for each other, was not dependent on detail: it grew not from the
nerves but from the soul.

“I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars
And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg of
the wren, And the tree toad is a chef-d’oeuvre for the highest, And the
running blackberry would adorn the parlours of heaven.”

They had never read these lines, and would have thought them nonsense if
they had. They did not dissect--indeed they could not. But she, at all
events, divined that more than perfect health and perfect weather, more
than personal love, had gone to the making of those seventeen days.

“Ordinary people!” cried Mrs. Failing on hearing the letter. At that
time she was young and daring. “Why, they’re divine! They’re forces of
Nature! They’re as ordinary as volcanoes. We all knew my brother was
disgusting, and wanted him to be blown to pieces, but we never thought
it would happen. Do look at the thing bravely, and say, as I do, that
they are guiltless in the sight of God.”

“I think they are,” replied her husband. “But they are not guiltless in
the sight of man.”

“You conventional!” she exclaimed in disgust. “What they have done means
misery not only for themselves but for others. For your brother, though
you will not think of him. For the little boy--did you think of him? And
perhaps for another child, who will have the whole world against him if
it knows. They have sinned against society, and you do not diminish
the misery by proving that society is bad or foolish. It is the saddest
truth I have yet perceived that the Beloved Republic”--here she took up
a book--“of which Swinburne speaks”--she put the book down--“will not
be brought about by love alone. It will approach with no flourish
of trumpets, and have no declaration of independence. Self-sacrifice
and--worse still--self-mutilation are the things that sometimes help it
most, and that is why we should start for Stockholm this evening.” He
waited for her indignation to subside, and then continued. “I don’t know
whether it can be hushed up. I don’t yet know whether it ought to be
hushed up. But we ought to provide the opportunity. There is no scandal
yet. If we go, it is just possible there never will be any. We must talk
over the whole thing and--”

“--And lie!” interrupted Mrs. Failing, who hated travel.

“--And see how to avoid the greatest unhappiness.”

There was to be no scandal. By the time they arrived Robert had been
drowned. Mrs. Elliot described how they had gone swimming, and how,
“since he always lived inland,” the great waves had tired him. They had
raced for the open sea.

“What are your plans?” he asked. “I bring you a message from Frederick.”

“I heard him call,” she continued, “but I thought he was laughing. When
I turned, it was too late. He put his hands behind his back and sank.
For he would only have drowned me with him. I should have done the
same.”

Mrs. Failing was thrilled, and kissed her. But Mr. Failing knew that
life does not continue heroic for long, and he gave her the message from
her husband: Would she come back to him?

To his intense astonishment--at first to his regret--she replied, “I
will think about it. If I loved him the very least bit I should say no.
If I had anything to do with my life I should say no. But it is simply
a question of beating time till I die. Nothing that is coming matters. I
may as well sit in his drawing-room and dust his furniture, since he has
suggested it.”

And Mr. Elliot, though he made certain stipulations, was positively glad
to see her. People had begun to laugh at him, and to say that his wife
had run away. She had not. She had been with his sister in Sweden. In
a half miraculous way the matter was hushed up. Even the Silts only
scented “something strange.” When Stephen was born, it was abroad. When
he came to England, it was as the child of a friend of Mr. Failing’s.
Mrs. Elliot returned unsuspected to her husband.

But though things can be hushed up, there is no such thing as beating
time; and as the years passed she realized her terrible mistake. When
her lover sank, eluding her last embrace, she thought, as Agnes was to
think after her, that her soul had sunk with him, and that never again
should she be capable of earthly love. Nothing mattered. She might as
well go and be useful to her husband and to the little boy who looked
exactly like him, and who, she thought, was exactly like him in
disposition. Then Stephen was born, and altered her life. She could
still love people passionately; she still drew strength from the heroic
past. Yet, to keep to her bond, she must see this son only as a
stranger. She was protected be the conventions, and must pay them their
fee. And a curious thing happened. Her second child drew her towards her
first. She began to love Rickie also, and to be more than useful to him.
And as her love revived, so did her capacity for suffering. Life, more
important, grew more bitter. She minded her husband more, not less; and
when at last he died, and she saw a glorious autumn, beautiful with the
voices of boys who should call her mother, the end came for her as well,
before she could remember the grave in the alien north and the dust that
would never return to the dear fields that had given it.



XXX

Stephen, the son of these people, had one instinct that troubled him.
At night--especially out of doors--it seemed rather strange that he was
alive. The dry grass pricked his cheek, the fields were invisible and
mute, and here was he, throwing stones at the darkness or smoking a
pipe. The stones vanished, the pipe would burn out. But he would be here
in the morning when the sun rose, and he would bathe, and run in the
mist. He was proud of his good circulation, and in the morning it seemed
quite natural. But at night, why should there be this difference between
him and the acres of land that cooled all round him until the sun
returned? What lucky chance had heated him up, and sent him, warm and
lovable, into a passive world? He had other instincts, but these gave
him no trouble. He simply gratified each as it occurred, provided he
could do so without grave injury to his fellows. But the instinct to
wonder at the night was not to be thus appeased. At first he had lived
under the care of Mr. Failing the only person to whom his mother spoke
freely, the only person who had treated her neither as a criminal nor as
a pioneer. In their rare but intimate conversations she had asked him to
educate her son. “I will teach him Latin,” he answered. “The rest such
a boy must remember.” Latin, at all events, was a failure: who could
attend to Virgil when the sound of the thresher arose, and you knew
that the stack was decreasing and that rats rushed more plentifully each
moment to their doom? But he was fond of Mr. Failing, and cried when he
died. Mrs. Elliot, a pleasant woman, died soon after.

There was something fatal in the order of these deaths. Mr. Failing had
made no provision for the boy in his will: his wife had promised to
see to this. Then came Mr. Elliot’s death, and, before the new home
was created, the sudden death of Mrs. Elliot. She also left Stephen no
money: she had none to leave. Chance threw him into the power of Mrs.
Failing. “Let things go on as they are,” she thought. “I will take care
of this pretty little boy, and the ugly little boy can live with the
Silts. After my death--well, the papers will be found after my death,
and they can meet then. I like the idea of their mutual ignorance. It is
amusing.”

He was then twelve. With a few brief intervals of school, he lived in
Wiltshire until he was driven out. Life had two distinct sides--the
drawing-room and the other. In the drawing-room people talked a good
deal, laughing as they talked. Being clever, they did not care for
animals: one man had never seen a hedgehog. In the other life people
talked and laughed separately, or even did neither. On the whole, in
spite of the wet and gamekeepers, this life was preferable. He knew
where he was. He glanced at the boy, or later at the man, and behaved
accordingly. There was no law--the policeman was negligible. Nothing
bound him but his own word, and he gave that sparingly.

It is impossible to be romantic when you have your heart’s desire, and
such a boy disappointed Mrs. Failing greatly. His parents had met for
one brief embrace, had found one little interval between the power of
the rulers of this world and the power of death. He was the child of
poetry and of rebellion, and poetry should run in his veins. But he
lived too near the things he loved to seem poetical. Parted from them,
he might yet satisfy her, and stretch out his hands with a pagan’s
yearning. As it was, he only rode her horses, and trespassed, and
bathed, and worked, for no obvious reason, upon her fields. Affection
she did not believe in, and made no attempt to mould him; and he, for
his part, was very content to harden untouched into a man. His parents
had given him excellent gifts--health, sturdy limbs, and a face not
ugly,--gifts that his habits confirmed. They had also given him a
cloudless spirit--the spirit of the seventeen days in which he was
created. But they had not given him the spirit of their sit years of
waiting, and love for one person was never to be the greatest thing he
knew.

“Philosophy” had postponed the quarrel between them. Incurious about his
personal origin, he had a certain interest in our eternal problems. The
interest never became a passion: it sprang out of his physical growth,
and was soon merged in it again. Or, as he put it himself, “I must get
fixed up before starting.” He was soon fixed up as a materialist. Then
he tore up the sixpenny reprints, and never amused Mrs. Failing so much
again.

About the time he fixed himself up, he took to drink. He knew of no
reason against it. The instinct was in him, and it hurt nobody. Here, as
elsewhere, his motions were decided, and he passed at once from roaring
jollity to silence. For those who live on the fuddled borderland, who
crawl home by the railings and maunder repentance in the morning, he had
a biting contempt. A man must take his tumble and his headache. He was,
in fact, as little disgusting as is conceivable; and hitherto he had not
strained his constitution or his will. Nor did he get drunk as often as
Agnes suggested. The real quarrel gathered elsewhere.


Presentable people have run wild in their youth. But the hour comes when
they turn from their boorish company to higher things. This hour never
came for Stephen. Somewhat a bully by nature, he kept where his powers
would tell, and continued to quarrel and play with the men he had known
as boys. He prolonged their youth unduly. “They won’t settle down,” said
Mr. Wilbraham to his wife. “They’re wanting things. It’s the germ of
a Trades Union. I shall get rid of a few of the worst.” Then Stephen
rushed up to Mrs. Failing and worried her. “It wasn’t fair. So-and-so
was a good sort. He did his work. Keen about it? No. Why should he be?
Why should he be keen about somebody else’s land? But keen enough. And
very keen on football.” She laughed, and said a word about So-and-so
to Mr. Wilbraham. Mr. Wilbraham blazed up. “How could the farm go
on without discipline? How could there be discipline if Mr. Stephen
interfered? Mr. Stephen liked power. He spoke to the men like one of
themselves, and pretended it was all equality, but he took care to come
out top. Natural, of course, that, being a gentleman, he should. But
not natural for a gentleman to loiter all day with poor people and learn
their work, and put wrong notions into their heads, and carry their
newfangled grievances to Mrs. Failing. Which partly accounted for the
deficit on the past year.” She rebuked Stephen. Then he lost his temper,
was rude to her, and insulted Mr. Wilbraham.

The worst days of Mr. Failing’s rule seemed to be returning. And Stephen
had a practical experience, and also a taste for battle, that her
husband had never possessed. He drew up a list of grievances, some
absurd, others fundamental. No newspapers in the reading-room, you
could put a plate under the Thompsons’ door, no level cricket-pitch,
no allotments and no time to work in them, Mrs. Wilbraham’s knife-boy
underpaid. “Aren’t you a little unwise?” she asked coldly. “I am more
bored than you think over the farm.” She was wanting to correct the
proofs of the book and rewrite the prefatory memoir. In her irritation
she wrote to Agnes. Agnes replied sympathetically, and Mrs. Failing,
clever as she was, fell into the power of the younger woman. They
discussed him at first as a wretch of a boy; then he got drunk and
somehow it seemed more criminal. All that she needed now was a personal
grievance, which Agnes casually supplied. Though vindictive, she was
determined to treat him well, and thought with satisfaction of our
distant colonies. But he burst into an odd passion: he would sooner
starve than leave England. “Why?” she asked. “Are you in love?” He
picked up a lump of the chalk-they were by the arbour--and made no
answer. The vicar murmured, “It is not like going abroad--Greater
Britain--blood is thicker than water--” A lump of chalk broke her
drawing-room window on the Saturday.

Thus Stephen left Wiltshire, half-blackguard, half-martyr. Do not brand
him as a socialist. He had no quarrel with society, nor any particular
belief in people because they are poor. He only held the creed of “here
am I and there are you,” and therefore class distinctions were trivial
things to him, and life no decorous scheme, but a personal combat or a
personal truce. For the same reason ancestry also was trivial, and a man
not the dearer because the same woman was mother to them both. Yet it
seemed worth while to go to Sawston with the news. Perhaps nothing would
come of it; perhaps friendly intercourse, and a home while he looked
around.

When they wronged him he walked quietly away. He never thought of
allotting the blame, nor or appealing to Ansell, who still sat brooding
in the side-garden. He only knew that educated people could be horrible,
and that a clean liver must never enter Dunwood House again. The air
seemed stuffy. He spat in the gutter. Was it yesterday he had lain in
the rifle-butts over Salisbury? Slightly aggrieved, he wondered why he
was not back there now. “I ought to have written first,” he reflected.
“Here is my money gone. I cannot move. The Elliots have, as it were,
practically robbed me.” That was the only grudge he retained against
them. Their suspicions and insults were to him as the curses of a tramp
whom he passed by the wayside. They were dirty people, not his sort. He
summed up the complicated tragedy as a “take in.”

While Rickie was being carried upstairs, and while Ansell (had he known
it) was dashing about the streets for him, he lay under a railway arch
trying to settle his plans. He must pay back the friends who had given
him shillings and clothes. He thought of Flea, whose Sundays he was
spoiling--poor Flea, who ought to be in them now, shining before his
girl. “I daresay he’ll be ashamed and not go to see her, and then she’ll
take the other man.” He was also very hungry. That worm Mrs. Elliot
would be through her lunch by now. Trying his braces round him, and
tearing up those old wet documents, he stepped forth to make money. A
villainous young brute he looked: his clothes were dirty, and he had
lost the spring of the morning. Touching the walls, frowning, talking to
himself at times, he slouched disconsolately northwards; no wonder that
some tawdry girls screamed at him, or that matrons averted their eyes
as they hurried to afternoon church. He wandered from one suburb to
another, till he was among people more villainous than himself, who
bought his tobacco from him and sold him food. Again the neighbourhood
“went up,” and families, instead of sitting on their doorsteps, would
sit behind thick muslin curtains. Again it would “go down” into a more
avowed despair. Far into the night he wandered, until he came to a
solemn river majestic as a stream in hell. Therein were gathered
the waters of Central England--those that flow off Hindhead, off the
Chilterns, off Wiltshire north of the Plain. Therein they were made
intolerable ere they reached the sea. But the waters he had known
escaped. Their course lay southward into the Avon by forests and
beautiful fields, even swift, even pure, until they mirrored the tower
of Christchurch and greeted the ramparts of the Isle of Wight. Of these
he thought for a moment as he crossed the black river and entered the
heart of the modern world. Here he found employment. He was not hampered
by genteel traditions, and, as it was near quarter-day, managed to get
taken on at a furniture warehouse. He moved people from the suburbs
to London, from London to the suburbs, from one suburb to another. His
companions were hurried and querulous. In particular, he loathed
the foreman, a pious humbug who allowed no swearing, but indulged in
something far more degraded--the Cockney repartee. The London intellect,
so pert and shallow, like a stream that never reaches the ocean,
disgusted him almost as much as the London physique, which for all
its dexterity is not permanent, and seldom continues into the third
generation. His father, had he known it, had felt the same; for between
Mr. Elliot and the foreman the gulf was social, not spiritual: both
spent their lives in trying to be clever. And Tony Failing had once put
the thing into words: “There’s no such thing as a Londoner. He’s only a
country man on the road to sterility.”

At the end of ten days he had saved scarcely anything. Once he passed
the bank where a hundred pounds lay ready for him, but it was still
inconvenient for him to take them. Then duty sent him to a suburb not
very far from Sawston. In the evening a man who was driving a trap asked
him to hold it, and by mistake tipped him a sovereign. Stephen called
after him; but the man had a woman with him and wanted to show off, and
though he had meant to tip a shilling, and could not afford that, he
shouted back that his sovereign was as good as any one’s, and that if
Stephen did not think so he could do various things and go to various
places. On the action of this man much depends. Stephen changed the
sovereign into a postal order, and sent it off to the people at Cadford.
It did not pay them back, but it paid them something, and he felt that
his soul was free.

A few shillings remained in his pocket. They would have paid his fare
towards Wiltshire, a good county; but what should he do there? Who
would employ him? Today the journey did not seem worth while. “Tomorrow,
perhaps,” he thought, and determined to spend the money on pleasure of
another kind. Two-pence went for a ride on an electric tram. From the
top he saw the sun descend--a disc with a dark red edge. The same sun
was descending over Salisbury intolerably bright. Out of the golden haze
the spire would be piercing, like a purple needle; then mists arose from
the Avon and the other streams. Lamps flickered, but in the outer purity
the villages were already slumbering. Salisbury is only a Gothic upstart
beside these. For generations they have come down to her to buy or to
worship, and have found in her the reasonable crisis of their lives;
but generations before she was built they were clinging to the soil, and
renewing it with sheep and dogs and men, who found the crisis of their
lives upon Stonehenge. The blood of these men ran in Stephen; the vigour
they had won for him was as yet untarnished; out on those downs they had
united with rough women to make the thing he spoke of as “himself”; the
last of them has rescued a woman of a different kind from streets and
houses such as these. As the sun descended he got off the tram with a
smile of expectation. A public-house lay opposite, and a boy in a dirty
uniform was already lighting its enormous lamp. His lips parted, and he
went in.

Two hours later, when Rickie and Herbert were going the rounds, a brick
came crashing at the study window. Herbert peered into the garden, and a
hooligan slipped by him into the house, wrecked the hall, lurched up the
stairs, fell against the banisters, balanced for a moment on his spine,
and slid over. Herbert called for the police. Rickie, who was upon the
landing, caught the man by the knees and saved his life.

“What is it?” cried Agnes, emerging.

“It’s Stephen come back,” was the answer. “Hullo, Stephen!”



XXXI

Hither had Rickie moved in ten days--from disgust to penitence, from
penitence to longing from a life of horror to a new life, in which he
still surprised himself by unexpected words. Hullo, Stephen! For the son
of his mother had come back, to forgive him, as she would have done, to
live with him, as she had planned.

“He’s drunk this time,” said Agnes wearily. She too had altered: the
scandal was ageing her, and Ansell came to the house daily.

“Hullo, Stephen!”

But Stephen was now insensible.

“Stephen, you live here--”

“Good gracious me!” interposed Herbert. “My advice is, that we all go to
bed. The less said the better while our nerves are in this state. Very
well, Rickie. Of course, Wonham sleeps the night if you wish.” They
carried the drunken mass into the spare room. A mass of scandal it
seemed to one of them, a symbol of redemption to the other. Neither
acknowledged it a man, who would answer them back after a few hours’
rest.

“Ansell thought he would never forgive me,” said Rickie. “For once he’s
wrong.”

“Come to bed now, I think.” And as Rickie laid his hand on the sleeper’s
hair, he added, “You won’t do anything foolish, will you? You are still
in a morbid state. Your poor mother--Pardon me, dear boy; it is my turn
to speak out. You thought it was your father, and minded. It is your
mother. Surely you ought to mind more?”

“I have been too far back,” said Rickie gently. “Ansell took me on a
journey that was even new to him. We got behind right and wrong, to a
place where only one thing matters--that the Beloved should rise from
the dead.”

“But you won’t do anything rash?”

“Why should I?”

“Remember poor Agnes,” he stammered. “I--I am the first to acknowledge
that we might have pursued a different policy. But we are committed to
it now. It makes no difference whose son he is. I mean, he is the same
person. You and I and my sister stand or fall together. It was our
agreement from the first. I hope--No more of these distressing scenes
with her, there’s a dear fellow. I assure you they make my heart bleed.”

“Things will quiet down now.”

“To bed now; I insist upon that much.”

“Very well,” said Rickie, and when they were in the passage, locked the
door from the outside. “We want no more muddles,” he explained.

Mr. Pembroke was left examining the hall. The bust of Hermes was broken.
So was the pot of the palm. He could not go to bed without once more
sounding Rickie. “You’ll do nothing rash,” he called. “The notion of him
living here was, of course, a passing impulse. We three have adopted a
common policy.”

“Now, you go away!” called a voice that was almost flippant. “I never
did belong to that great sect whose doctrine is that each one should
select--at least, I’m not going to belong to it any longer. Go away to
bed.”

“A good night’s rest is what you need,” threatened Herbert, and retired,
not to find one for himself.

But Rickie slept. The guilt of months and the remorse of the last ten
days had alike departed. He had thought that his life was poisoned, and
lo! it was purified. He had cursed his mother, and Ansell had replied,
“You may be right, but you stand too near to settle. Step backwards.
Pretend that it happened to me. Do you want me to curse my mother?
Now, step forward and see whether anything has changed.” Something had
changed. He had journeyed--as on rare occasions a man must--till he
stood behind right and wrong. On the banks of the grey torrent of life,
love is the only flower. A little way up the stream and a little way
down had Rickie glanced, and he knew that she whom he loved had risen
from the dead, and might rise again. “Come away--let them die out--let
them die out.” Surely that dream was a vision! To-night also he hurried
to the window--to remember, with a smile, that Orion is not among the
stars of June.

“Let me die out. She will continue,” he murmured, and in making plans
for Stephen’s happiness, fell asleep.

Next morning after breakfast he announced that his brother must live
at Dunwood House. They were awed by the very moderation of his tone.
“There’s nothing else to be done. Cadover’s hopeless, and a boy of those
tendencies can’t go drifting. There is also the question of a profession
for him, and his allowance.”

“We have to thank Mr. Ansell for this,” was all that Agnes could say;
and “I foresee disaster,” was the contribution of Herbert.

“There’s plenty of money about,” Rickie continued. “Quite a man’s-worth
too much. It has been one of our absurdities. Don’t look so sad,
Herbert. I’m sorry for you people, but he’s sure to let us down easy.”
 For his experience of drunkards and of Stephen was small.

He supposed that he had come without malice to renew the offer of ten
days ago.

“It is the end of Dunwood House.”

Rickie nodded, and hoped not. Agnes, who was not looking well, began to
cry. “Oh, it is too bad,” she complained, “when I’ve saved you from him
all these years.” But he could not pity her, nor even sympathize with
her wounded delicacy. The time for such nonsense was over. He would take
his share of the blame: it was cant to assume it all.

Perhaps he was over-hard. He did not realize how large his share was,
nor how his very virtues were to blame for her deterioration. “If I had
a girl, I’d keep her in line,” is not the remark of a fool nor of a cad.
Rickie had not kept his wife in line. He had shown her all the workings
of his soul, mistaking this for love; and in consequence she was the
worse woman after two years of marriage, and he, on this morning of
freedom, was harder upon her than he need have been.

The spare room bell rang. Herbert had a painful struggle between
curiosity and duty, for the bell for chapel was ringing also, and he
must go through the drizzle to school. He promised to come up in the
interval, Rickie, who had rapped his head that Sunday on the edge of
the table, was still forbidden to work. Before him a quiet morning lay.
Secure of his victory, he took the portrait of their mother in his hand
and walked leisurely upstairs. The bell continued to ring.

“See about his breakfast,” he called to Agnes, who replied, “Very well.”
 The handle of the spare room door was moving slowly. “I’m coming,” he
cried. The handle was still. He unlocked and entered, his heart full of
charity.

But within stood a man who probably owned the world.

Rickie scarcely knew him; last night he had seemed so colorless, no
negligible. In a few hours he had recaptured motion and passion and the
imprint of the sunlight and the wind. He stood, not consciously heroic,
with arms that dangled from broad stooping shoulders, and feet that
played with a hassock on the carpet. But his hair was beautiful against
the grey sky, and his eyes, recalling the sky unclouded, shot past the
intruder as if to some worthier vision. So intent was their gaze that
Rickie himself glanced backwards, only to see the neat passage and the
banisters at the top of the stairs. Then the lips beat together twice,
and out burst a torrent of amazing words.

“Add it all up, and let me know how much. I’d sooner have died. It never
took me that way before. I must have broken pounds’ worth. If you’ll not
tell the police, I promise you shan’t lose, Mr. Elliot, I swear. But it
may be months before I send it. Everything is to be new. You’ve not to
be a penny out of pocket, do you see? Do let me go, this once again.”

“What’s the trouble?” asked Rickie, as if they had been friends for
years. “My dear man, we’ve other things to talk about. Gracious me, what
a fuss! If you’d smashed the whole house I wouldn’t mind, so long as you
came back.”

“I’d sooner have died,” gulped Stephen.

“You did nearly! It was I who caught you. Never mind yesterday’s rag.
What can you manage for breakfast?”

The face grew more angry and more puzzled. “Yesterday wasn’t a rag,” he
said without focusing his eyes. “I was drunk, but naturally meant it.”

“Meant what?”

“To smash you. Bad liquor did what Mrs. Elliot couldn’t. I’ve put myself
in the wrong. You’ve got me.”

It was a poor beginning.

“As I have got you,” said Rickie, controlling himself, “I want to have a
talk with you. There has been a ghastly mistake.”

But Stephen, with a countryman’s persistency, continued on his own line.
He meant to be civil, but Rickie went cold round the mouth. For he had
not even been angry with them. Until he was drunk, they had been dirty
people--not his sort. Then the trivial injury recurred, and he had
reeled to smash them as he passed. “And I will pay for everything,” was
his refrain, with which the sighing of raindrops mingled. “You shan’t
lose a penny, if only you let me free.”

“You’ll pay for my coffin if you talk like that any longer! Will you,
one, forgive my frightful behaviour; two, live with me?” For his only
hope was in a cheerful precision.

Stephen grew more agitated. He thought it was some trick.

“I was saying I made an unspeakable mistake. Ansell put me right, but it
was too late to find you. Don’t think I got off easily. Ansell doesn’t
spare one. And you’ve got to forgive me, to share my life, to share
my money.--I’ve brought you this photograph--I want it to be the first
thing you accept from me--you have the greater right--I know all the
story now. You know who it is?”

“Oh yes; but I don’t want to drag all that in.”

“It is only her wish if we live together. She was planning it when she
died.”

“I can’t follow--because--to share your life? Did you know I called here
last Sunday week?”

“Yes. But then I only knew half. I thought you were my father’s son.”

Stephen’s anger and bewilderment were increasing. He stuttered.
“What--what’s the odds if you did?”

“I hated my father,” said Rickie. “I loved my mother.” And never had the
phrases seemed so destitute of meaning.

“Last Sunday week,” interrupted Stephen, his voice suddenly rising,
“I came to call on you. Not as this or that’s son. Not to fall on your
neck. Nor to live here. Nor--damn your dirty little mind! I meant to
say I didn’t come for money. Sorry. Sorry. I simply came as I was, and I
haven’t altered since.”

“Yes--yet our mother--for me she has risen from the dead since then--I
know I was wrong--”

“And where do I come in?” He kicked the hassock. “I haven’t risen from
the dead. I haven’t altered since last Sunday week. I’m--” He stuttered
again. He could not quite explain what he was. “The man towards
Andover--after all, he was having principles. But you’ve--” His voice
broke. “I mind it--I’m--I don’t alter--blackguard one week--live here
the next--I keep to one or the other--you’ve hurt something most badly
in me that I didn’t know was there.”

“Don’t let us talk,” said Rickie. “It gets worse every minute. Simply
say you forgive me; shake hands, and have done with it.”

“That I won’t. That I couldn’t. In fact, I don’t know what you mean.”

Then Rickie began a new appeal--not to pity, for now he was in no mood
to whimper. For all its pathos, there was something heroic in this
meeting. “I warn you to stop here with me, Stephen. No one else in the
world will look after you. As far as I know, you have never been really
unhappy yet or suffered, as you should do, from your faults. Last night
you nearly killed yourself with drink. Never mind why I’m willing to
cure you. I am willing, and I warn you to give me the chance. Forgive me
or not, as you choose. I care for other things more.”

Stephen looked at him at last, faintly approving. The offer was
ridiculous, but it did treat him as a man.

“Let me tell you of a fault of mine, and how I was punished for it,”
 continued Rickie. “Two years ago I behaved badly to you, up at the
Rings. No, even a few days before that. We went for a ride, and I
thought too much of other matters, and did not try to understand you.
Then came the Rings, and in the evening, when you called up to me most
kindly, I never answered. But the ride was the beginning. Ever since
then I have taken the world at second-hand. I have bothered less and
less to look it in the face--until not only you, but every one else has
turned unreal. Never Ansell: he kept away, and somehow saved himself.
But every one else. Do you remember in one of Tony Failing’s books,
‘Cast bitter bread upon the waters, and after many days it really does
come back to you’? This had been true of my life; it will be equally
true of a drunkard’s, and I warn you to stop with me.”

“I can’t stop after that cheque,” said Stephen more gently. “But I do
remember the ride. I was a bit bored myself.”

Agnes, who had not been seeing to the breakfast, chose this moment to
call from the passage. “Of course he can’t stop,” she exclaimed. “For
better or worse, it’s settled. We’ve none of us altered since last
Sunday week.”

“There you’re right, Mrs. Elliot!” he shouted, starting out of the
temperate past. “We haven’t altered.” With a rare flash of insight he
turned on Rickie. “I see your game. You don’t care about ME drinking, or
to shake MY hand. It’s some one else you want to cure--as it were,
that old photograph. You talk to me, but all the time you look at the
photograph.” He snatched it up.

“I’ve my own ideas of good manners, and to look friends between the eyes
is one of them; and this”--he tore the photograph across “and this”--he
tore it again--“and these--” He flung the pieces at the man, who had
sunk into a chair. “For my part, I’m off.”

Then Rickie was heroic no longer. Turning round in his chair, he covered
his face. The man was right. He did not love him, even as he had never
hated him. In either passion he had degraded him to be a symbol for the
vanished past. The man was right, and would have been lovable. He longed
to be back riding over those windy fields, to be back in those mystic
circles, beneath pure sky. Then they could have watched and helped and
taught each other, until the word was a reality, and the past not a torn
photograph, but Demeter the goddess rejoicing in the spring. Ah, if he
had seized those high opportunities! For they led to the highest of all,
the symbolic moment, which, if a man accepts, he has accepted life.

The voice of Agnes, which had lured him then (“For my sake,” she had
whispered), pealed over him now in triumph. Abruptly it broke into sobs
that had the effect of rain. He started up. The anger had died out of
Stephen’s face, not for a subtle reason but because here was a woman,
near him, and unhappy.

She tried to apologize, and brought on a fresh burst of tears. Something
had upset her. They heard her locking the door of her room. From that
moment their intercourse was changed.

“Why does she keep crying today?” mused Rickie, as if he spoke to some
mutual friend.

“I can make a guess,” said Stephen, and his heavy face flushed.

“Did you insult her?” he asked feebly.

“But who’s Gerald?”

Rickie raised his hand to his mouth.

“She looked at me as if she knew me, and then gasps ‘Gerald,’ and
started crying.”

“Gerald is the name of some one she once knew.”

“So I thought.” There was a long silence, in which they could hear a
piteous gulping cough. “Where is he now?” asked Stephen.

“Dead.”

“And then you--?”

Rickie nodded.

“Bad, this sort of thing.”

“I didn’t know of this particular thing. She acted as if she had
forgotten him. Perhaps she had, and you woke him up. There are queer
tricks in the world. She is overstrained. She has probably been plotting
ever since you burst in last night.”

“Against me?”

“Yes.”

Stephen stood irresolute. “I suppose you and she pulled together?” He
said at last.

“Get away from us, man! I mind losing you. Yet it’s as well you don’t
stop.”

“Oh, THAT’S out of the question,” said Stephen, brushing his cap.

“If you’ve guessed anything, I’d be obliged if you didn’t mention it.
I’ve no right to ask, but I’d be obliged.”

He nodded, and walked slowly along the landing and down the stairs.
Rickie accompanied him, and even opened the front door. It was as if
Agnes had absorbed the passion out of both of them. The suburb was now
wrapped in a cloud, not of its own making. Sigh after sigh passed along
its streets to break against dripping walls. The school, the houses
were hidden, and all civilization seemed in abeyance. Only the simplest
sounds, the simplest desires emerged. They agreed that this weather was
strange after such a sunset.

“That’s a collie,” said Stephen, listening.

“I wish you’d have some breakfast before starting.”

“No food, thanks. But you know” He paused. “It’s all been a muddle, and
I’ve no objection to your coming along with me.”

The cloud descended lower.

“Come with me as a man,” said Stephen, already out in the mist. “Not as
a brother; who cares what people did years back? We’re alive together,
and the rest is cant. Here am I, Rickie, and there are you, a fair
wreck. They’ve no use for you here,--never had any, if the truth was
known,--and they’ve only made you beastly. This house, so to speak, has
the rot. It’s common-sense that you should come.”

“Stephen, wait a minute. What do you mean?”

“Wait’s what we won’t do,” said Stephen at the gate.

“I must ask--”

He did wait for a minute, and sobs were heard, faint, hopeless,
vindictive. Then he trudged away, and Rickie soon lost his colour and
his form. But a voice persisted, saying, “Come, I do mean it. Come; I
will take care of you, I can manage you.”

The words were kind; yet it was not for their sake that Rickie plunged
into the impalpable cloud. In the voice he had found a surer guarantee.
Habits and sex may change with the new generation, features may alter
with the play of a private passion, but a voice is apart from these. It
lies nearer to the racial essence and perhaps to the divine; it can, at
all events, overleap one grave.



XXXII

Mr. Pembroke did not receive a clear account of what had happened when
he returned for the interval. His sister--he told her frankly--was
concealing something from him. She could make no reply. Had she gone
mad, she wondered. Hitherto she had pretended to love her husband. Why
choose such a moment for the truth?

“But I understand Rickie’s position,” he told her. “It is an unbalanced
position, yet I understand it; I noted its approach while he was ill.
He imagines himself his brother’s keeper. Therefore we must make
concessions. We must negotiate.” The negotiations were still progressing
in November, the month during which this story draws to its close.

“I understand his position,” he then told her. “It is both weak and
defiant. He is still with those Ansells. Read this letter, which thanks
me for his little stories. We sent them last month, you remember--such
of them as we could find. It seems that he fills up his time by writing:
he has already written a book.”

She only gave him half her attention, for a beautiful wreath had just
arrived from the florist’s. She was taking it up to the cemetery: today
her child had been dead a year.

“On the other hand, he has altered his will. Fortunately, he cannot
alter much. But I fear that what is not settled on you, will go. Should
I read what I wrote on this point, and also my minutes of the interview
with old Mr. Ansell, and the copy of my correspondence with Stephen
Wonham?”

But her fly was announced. While he put the wreath in for her, she ran
for a moment upstairs. A few tears had come to her eyes. A scandalous
divorce would have been more bearable than this withdrawal. People
asked, “Why did her husband leave her?” and the answer came, “Oh,
nothing particular; he only couldn’t stand her; she lied and taught him
to lie; she kept him from the work that suited him, from his friends,
from his brother,--in a word, she tried to run him, which a man won’t
pardon.” A few tears; not many. To her, life never showed itself as a
classic drama, in which, by trying to advance our fortunes, we shatter
them. She had turned Stephen out of Wiltshire, and he fell like a
thunderbolt on Sawston and on herself. In trying to gain Mrs. Failing’s
money she had probably lost money which would have been her own. But
irony is a subtle teacher, and she was not the woman to learn from such
lessons as these. Her suffering was more direct. Three men had wronged
her; therefore she hated them, and, if she could, would do them harm.

“These negotiations are quite useless,” she told Herbert when she
came downstairs. “We had much better bide our time. Tell me just about
Stephen Wonham, though.”

He drew her into the study again. “Wonham is or was in Scotland,
learning to farm with connections of the Ansells: I believe the money
is to go towards setting him up. Apparently he is a hard worker. He also
drinks!”

She nodded and smiled. “More than he did?”

“My informant, Mr. Tilliard--oh, I ought not to have mentioned his name.
He is one of the better sort of Rickie’s Cambridge friends, and has been
dreadfully grieved at the collapse, but he does not want to be mixed up
in it. This autumn he was up in the Lowlands, close by, and very kindly
made a few unobtrusive inquiries for me. The man is becoming an habitual
drunkard.”

She smiled again. Stephen had evoked her secret, and she hated him
more for that than for anything else that he had done. The poise of his
shoulders that morning--it was no more--had recalled Gerald.

If only she had not been so tired! He had reminded her of the greatest
thing she had known, and to her cloudy mind this seemed degradation. She
had turned to him as to her lover; with a look, which a man of his type
understood, she had asked for his pity; for one terrible moment she
had desired to be held in his arms. Even Herbert was surprised when she
said, “I’m glad he drinks. I hope he’ll kill himself. A man like that
ought never to have been born.”

“Perhaps the sins of the parents are visited on the children,” said
Herbert, taking her to the carriage. “Yet it is not for us to decide.”

“I feel sure he will be punished. What right has he--” She broke off.
What right had he to our common humanity? It was a hard lesson for
any one to learn. For Agnes it was impossible. Stephen was illicit,
abnormal, worse than a man diseased. Yet she had turned to him: he had
drawn out the truth.

“My dear, don’t cry,” said her brother, drawing up the windows. “I have
great hopes of Mr. Tilliard--the Silts have written--Mrs. Failing will
do what she can--”

As she drove to the cemetery, her bitterness turned against Ansell, who
had kept her husband alive in the days after Stephen’s expulsion. If
he had not been there, Rickie would have renounced his mother and his
brother and all the outer world, troubling no one. The mystic, inherent
in him, would have prevailed. So Ansell himself had told her. And
Ansell, too, had sheltered the fugitives and given them money, and saved
them from the ludicrous checks that so often stop young men. But when
she reached the cemetery, and stood beside the tiny grave, all her
bitterness, all her hatred were turned against Rickie.

“But he’ll come back in the end,” she thought. “A wife has only to wait.
What are his friends beside me? They too will marry. I have only to
wait. His book, like all that he has done, will fail. His brother is
drinking himself away. Poor aimless Rickie! I have only to keep civil.
He will come back in the end.”

She had moved, and found herself close to the grave of Gerald. The
flowers she had planted after his death were dead, and she had not liked
to renew them. There lay the athlete, and his dust was as the little
child’s whom she had brought into the world with such hope, with such
pain.



XXXIII

That same day Rickie, feeling neither poor nor aimless, left the
Ansells’ for a night’s visit to Cadover. His aunt had invited him--why,
he could not think, nor could he think why he should refuse the
invitation. She could not annoy him now, and he was not vindictive. In
the dell near Madingley he had cried, “I hate no one,” in his ignorance.
Now, with full knowledge, he hated no one again. The weather was
pleasant, the county attractive, and he was ready for a little change.

Maud and Stewart saw him off. Stephen, who was down for the holiday,
had been left with his chin on the luncheon table. He had wanted to come
also. Rickie pointed out that you cannot visit where you have broken the
windows. There was an argument--there generally was--and now the young
man had turned sulky.

“Let him do what he likes,” said Ansell. “He knows more than we do. He
knows everything.”

“Is he to get drunk?” Rickie asked.

“Most certainly.”

“And to go where he isn’t asked?”

Maud, though liking a little spirit in a man, declared this to be
impossible.

“Well, I wish you joy!” Rickie called, as the train moved away. “He
means mischief this evening. He told me piously that he felt it beating
up. Good-bye!”

“But we’ll wait for you to pass,” they cried. For the Salisbury train
always backed out of the station and then returned, and the Ansell
family, including Stewart, took an incredible pleasure in seeing it do
this.

The carriage was empty. Rickie settled himself down for his little
journey. First he looked at the coloured photographs. Then he read the
directions for obtaining luncheon-baskets, and felt the texture of the
cushions. Through the windows a signal-box interested him. Then he saw
the ugly little town that was now his home, and up its chief street the
Ansells’ memorable facade. The spirit of a genial comedy dwelt there. It
was so absurd, so kindly. The house was divided against itself and yet
stood. Metaphysics, commerce, social aspirations--all lived together in
harmony. Mr. Ansell had done much, but one was tempted to believe in a
more capricious power--the power that abstains from “nipping.” “One nips
or is nipped, and never knows beforehand,” quoted Rickie, and opened the
poems of Shelley, a man less foolish than you supposed. How pleasant
it was to read! If business worried him, if Stephen was noisy or Ansell
perverse, there still remained this paradise of books. It seemed as
if he had read nothing for two years. Then the train stopped for the
shunting, and he heard protests from minor officials who were working on
the line. They complained that some one who didn’t ought to, had mounted
on the footboard of the carriage. Stephen’s face appeared, convulsed
with laughter. With the action of a swimmer he dived in through the open
window, and fell comfortably on Rickie’s luggage and Rickie. He declared
it was the finest joke ever known. Rickie was not so sure. “You’ll be
run over next,” he said. “What did you do that for?”

“I’m coming with you,” he giggled, rolling all that he could on to the
dusty floor.

“Now, Stephen, this is too bad. Get up. We went into the whole question
yesterday.”

“I know; and I settled we wouldn’t go into it again, spoiling my
holiday.”

“Well, it’s execrable taste.”

Now he was waving to the Ansells, and showing them a piece of soap:
it was all his luggage, and even that he abandoned, for he flung it at
Stewart’s lofty brow.

“I can’t think what you’ve done it for. You know how strongly I felt.”

Stephen replied that he should stop in the village; meet Rickie at the
lodge gates; that kind of thing.

“It’s execrable taste,” he repeated, trying to keep grave.

“Well, you did all you could,” he exclaimed with sudden sympathy.
“Leaving me talking to old Ansell, you might have thought you’d got your
way. I’ve as much taste as most chaps, but, hang it! your aunt isn’t the
German Emperor. She doesn’t own Wiltshire.”

“You ass!” sputtered Rickie, who had taken to laugh at nonsense again.

“No, she isn’t,” he repeated, blowing a kiss out of the window to
maidens. “Why, we started for Wiltshire on the wet morning!”

“When Stewart found us at Sawston railway station?” He smiled happily.
“I never thought we should pull through.”

“Well, we DIDN’T. We never did what we meant. It’s nonsense that I
couldn’t have managed you alone. I’ve a notion. Slip out after your
dinner this evening, and we’ll get thundering tight together.”

“I’ve a notion I won’t.”

“It’d do you no end of good. You’ll get to know people--shepherds,
carters--” He waved his arms vaguely, indicating democracy. “Then you’ll
sing.”

“And then?”

“Plop.”

“Precisely.”

“But I’ll catch you,” promised Stephen. “We shall carry you up the hill
to bed. In the morning you wake, have your row with old Em’ly, she kicks
you out, we meet--we’ll meet at the Rings!” He danced up and down the
carriage. Some one in the next carriage punched at the partition, and
when this happens, all lads with mettle know that they must punch the
partition back.

“Thank you. I’ve a notion I won’t,” said Rickie when the noise had
subsided--subsided for a moment only, for the following conversation
took place to an accompaniment of dust and bangs. “Except as regards the
Rings. We will meet there.”

“Then I’ll get tight by myself.”

“No, you won’t.”

“Yes, I will. I swore to do something special this evening. I feel like
it.”

“In that case, I get out at the next station.” He was laughing, but
quite determined. Stephen had grown too dictatorial of late. The Ansells
spoilt him. “It’s bad enough having you there at all. Having you there
drunk is impossible. I’d sooner not visit my aunt than think, when I sat
with her, that you’re down in the village teaching her labourers to be
as beastly as yourself. Go if you will. But not with me.”

“Why shouldn’t I have a good time while I’m young, if I don’t harm any
one?” said Stephen defiantly.

“Need we discuss self.”

“Oh, I can stop myself any minute I choose. I just say ‘I won’t’ to you
or any other fool, and I don’t.”

Rickie knew that the boast was true. He continued, “There is also a
thing called Morality. You may learn in the Bible, and also from the
Greeks, that your body is a temple.”

“So you said in your longest letter.”

“Probably I wrote like a prig, for the reason that I have never been
tempted in this way; but surely it is wrong that your body should escape
you.”

“I don’t follow,” he retorted, punching.

“It isn’t right, even for a little time, to forget that you exist.”

“I suppose you’ve never been tempted to go to sleep?”

Just then the train passed through a coppice in which the grey
undergrowth looked no more alive than firewood. Yet every twig in it
was waiting for the spring. Rickie knew that the analogy was false, but
argument confused him, and he gave up this line of attack also.

“Do be more careful over life. If your body escapes you in one thing,
why not in more? A man will have other temptations.”

“You mean women,” said Stephen quietly, pausing for a moment in this
game. “But that’s absolutely different. That would be harming some one
else.”

“Is that the only thing that keeps you straight?”

“What else should?” And he looked not into Rickie, but past him, with
the wondering eyes of a child. Rickie nodded, and referred himself to
the window.

He observed that the country was smoother and more plastic. The woods
had gone, and under a pale-blue sky long contours of earth were flowing,
and merging, rising a little to bear some coronal of beeches, parting a
little to disclose some green valley, where cottages stood under elms
or beside translucent waters. It was Wiltshire at last. The train had
entered the chalk. At last it slackened at a wayside platform. Without
speaking he opened the door.

“What’s that for?”

“To go back.”

Stephen had forgotten the threat. He said that this was not playing the
game.

“Surely!”

“I can’t have you going back.”

“Promise to behave decently then.”

He was seized and pulled away from the door.

“We change at Salisbury,” he remarked. “There is an hour to wait. You
will find me troublesome.”

“It isn’t fair,” exploded Stephen. “It’s a lowdown trick. How can I let
you go back?”

“Promise, then.”

“Oh, yes, yes, yes. Y.M.C.A. But for this occasion only.”

“No, no. For the rest of your holiday.”

“Yes, yes. Very well. I promise.”

“For the rest of your life?”

Somehow it pleased him that Stephen should bang him crossly with his
elbow and say, “No. Get out. You’ve gone too far.” So had the train.
The porter at the end of the wayside platform slammed the door, and they
proceeded toward Salisbury through the slowly modulating downs. Rickie
pretended to read. Over the book he watched his brother’s face, and
wondered how bad temper could be consistent with a mind so radiant. In
spite of his obstinacy and conceit, Stephen was an easy person to live
with. He never fidgeted or nursed hidden grievances, or indulged in a
shoddy pride. Though he spent Rickie’s money as slowly as he could,
he asked for it without apology: “You must put it down against me,” he
would say. In time--it was still very vague--he would rent or purchase
a farm. There is no formula in which we may sum up decent people. So
Ansell had preached, and had of course proceeded to offer a formula:
“They must be serious, they must be truthful.” Serious not in the sense
of glum; but they must be convinced that our life is a state of some
importance, and our earth not a place to beat time on. Of so much
Stephen was convinced: he showed it in his work, in his play, in his
self-respect, and above all--though the fact is hard to face-in his
sacred passion for alcohol. Drink, today, is an unlovely thing. Between
us and the heights of Cithaeron the river of sin now flows. Yet the
cries still call from the mountain, and granted a man has responded to
them, it is better he respond with the candour of the Greek.

“I shall stop at the Thompsons’ now,” said the disappointed reveller.
“Prayers.”

Rickie did not press his triumph, but it was a happy moment, partly
because of the triumph, partly because he was sure that his brother must
care for him. Stephen was too selfish to give up any pleasure without
grave reasons. He was certain that he had been right to disentangle
himself from Sawston, and to ignore the threats and tears that still
tempted him to return. Here there was real work for him to do. Moreover,
though he sought no reward, it had come. His health was better, his
brain sound, his life washed clean, not by the waters of sentiment,
but by the efforts of a fellow-man. Stephen was man first, brother
afterwards. Herein lay his brutality and also his virtue. “Look me in
the face. Don’t hang on me clothes that don’t belong--as you did on your
wife, giving her saint’s robes, whereas she was simply a woman of her
own sort, who needed careful watching. Tear up the photographs. Here
am I, and there are you. The rest is cant.” The rest was not cant,
and perhaps Stephen would confess as much in time. But Rickie needed a
tonic, and a man, not a brother, must hold it to his lips.

“I see the old spire,” he called, and then added, “I don’t mind seeing
it again.”

“No one does, as far as I know. People have come from the other side of
the world to see it again.”

“Pious people. But I don’t hold with bishops.” He was young enough to
be uneasy. The cathedral, a fount of superstition, must find no place in
his life. At the age of twenty he had settled things.

“I’ve got my own philosophy,” he once told Ansell, “and I don’t care a
straw about yours.” Ansell’s mirth had annoyed him not a little. And
it was strange that one so settled should feel his heart leap up at
the sight of an old spire. “I regard it as a public building,” he told
Rickie, who agreed. “It’s useful, too, as a landmark.” His attitude
today was defensive. It was part of a subtle change that Rickie had
noted in him since his return from Scotland. His face gave hints of a
new maturity. “You can see the old spire from the Ridgeway,” he said,
suddenly laying a hand on Rickie’s knee, “before rain as clearly as any
telegraph post.”

“How far is the Ridgeway?”

“Seventeen miles.”

“Which direction?”

“North, naturally. North again from that you see Devizes, the vale of
Pewsey, and the other downs. Also towards Bath. It is something of a
view. You ought to get on the Ridgeway.”

“I shouldn’t have time for that.”

“Or Beacon Hill. Or let’s do Stonehenge.”

“If it’s fine, I suggest the Rings.”

“It will be fine.” Then he murmured the names of villages.

“I wish you could live here,” said Rickie kindly. “I believe you love
these particular acres more than the whole world.”

Stephen replied that this was not the case: he was only used to them.
He wished they were driving out, instead of waiting for the Cadchurch
train.

They had advanced into Salisbury, and the cathedral, a public building,
was grey against a tender sky. Rickie suggested that, while waiting
for the train, they should visit it. He spoke of the incomparable north
porch. “I’ve never been inside it, and I never will. Sorry to shock you,
Rickie, but I must tell you plainly. I’m an atheist. I don’t believe in
anything.”

“I do,” said Rickie.

“When a man dies, it’s as if he’s never been,” he asserted. The train
drew up in Salisbury station. Here a little incident took place which
caused them to alter their plans.

They found outside the station a trap driven by a small boy, who had
come in from Cadford to fetch some wire-netting. “That’ll do us,” said
Stephen, and called to the boy, “If I pay your railway-ticket back, and
if I give you sixpence as well, will you let us drive back in the
trap?” The boy said no. “It will be all right,” said Rickie. “I am Mrs.
Failing’s nephew.” The boy shook his head. “And you know Mr. Wonham?”
 The boy couldn’t say he didn’t. “Then what’s your objection? Why? What
is it? Why not?” But Stephen leant against the time-tables and spoke of
other matters.

Presently the boy said, “Did you say you’d pay my railway-ticket back,
Mr. Wonham?”

“Yes,” said a bystander. “Didn’t you hear him?”

“I heard him right enough.”

Now Stephen laid his hand on the splash-board, saying, “What I want,
though, is this trap here of yours, see, to drive in back myself;” and
as he spoke the bystander followed him in canon, “What he wants, though,
is that there trap of yours, see, to drive hisself back in.”

“I’ve no objection,” said the boy, as if deeply offended. For a time he
sat motionless, and then got down, remarking, “I won’t rob you of your
sixpence.”

“Silly little fool,” snapped Rickie, as they drove through the town.

Stephen looked surprised. “What’s wrong with the boy? He had to think it
over. No one had asked him to do such a thing before. Next time he’d let
us have the trap quick enough.”

“Not if he had driven in for a cabbage instead of wire-netting.”

“He never would drive in for a cabbage.”

Rickie shuffled his feet. But his irritation passed. He saw that the
little incident had been a quiet challenge to the civilization that he
had known. “Organize.” “Systematize.” “Fill up every moment,” “Induce
esprit de corps.” He reviewed the watchwords of the last two years,
and found that they ignored personal contest, personal truces, personal
love. By following them Sawston School had lost its quiet usefulness
and become a frothy sea, wherein plunged Dunwood House, that unnecessary
ship. Humbled, he turned to Stephen and said, “No, you’re right. Nothing
is wrong with the boy. He was honestly thinking it out.” But Stephen had
forgotten the incident, or else he was not inclined to talk about it.
His assertive fit was over.

The direct road from Salisbury to Cadover is extremely dull. The
city--which God intended to keep by the river; did she not move there,
being thirsty, in the reign of William Rufus?--the city had strayed out
of her own plain, climbed up her slopes, and tumbled over them in ugly
cataracts of brick. The cataracts are still short, and doubtless they
meet or create some commercial need. But instead of looking towards
the cathedral, as all the city should, they look outwards at a pagan
entrenchment, as the city should not. They neglect the poise of the
earth, and the sentiments she has decreed. They are the modern spirit.

Through them the road descends into an unobtrusive country where,
nevertheless, the power of the earth grows stronger. Streams do divide.
Distances do still exist. It is easier to know the men in your valley
than those who live in the next, across a waste of down. It is easier to
know men well. The country is not paradise, and can show the vices that
grieve a good man everywhere. But there is room in it, and leisure.

“I suppose,” said Rickie as the twilight fell, “this kind of thing is
going on all over England.” Perhaps he meant that towns are after all
excrescences, grey fluxions, where men, hurrying to find one another,
have lost themselves. But he got no response, and expected none. Turning
round in his seat, he watched the winter sun slide out of a quiet sky.
The horizon was primrose, and the earth against it gave momentary hints
of purple. All faded: no pageant would conclude the gracious day, and
when he turned eastward the night was already established.

“Those verlands--” said Stephen, scarcely above his breath.

“What are verlands?”

He pointed at the dusk, and said, “Our name for a kind of field.” Then
he drove his whip into its socket, and seemed to swallow something.
Rickie, straining his eyes for verlands, could only see a tumbling
wilderness of brown.

“Are there many local words?”

“There have been.”

“I suppose they die out.”

The conversation turned curiously. In the tone of one who replies, he
said, “I expect that some time or other I shall marry.”

“I expect you will,” said Rickie, and wondered a little why the reply
seemed not abrupt. “Would we see the Rings in the daytime from here?”

“(We do see them.) But Mrs. Failing once said no decent woman would have
me.”

“Did you agree to that?”

“Drive a little, will you?”

The horse went slowly forward into the wilderness, that turned from
brown to black. Then a luminous glimmer surrounded them, and the air
grew cooler: the road was descending between parapets of chalk.

“But, Rickie, mightn’t I find a girl--naturally not refined--and be
happy with her in my own way? I would tell her straight I was nothing
much--faithful, of course, but that she should never have all my
thoughts. Out of no disrespect to her, but because all one’s thoughts
can’t belong to any single person.”

While he spoke even the road vanished, and invisible water came gurgling
through the wheel-spokes. The horse had chosen the ford. “You can’t own
people. At least a fellow can’t. It may be different for a poet. (Let
the horse drink.) And I want to marry some one, and don’t yet know who
she is, which a poet again will tell you is disgusting. Does it disgust
you? Being nothing much, surely I’d better go gently. For it’s something
rather outside that makes one marry, if you follow me: not exactly
oneself. (Don’t hurry the horse.) We want to marry, and yet--I can’t
explain. I fancy I’ll go wading: this is our stream.”

Romantic love is greater than this. There are men and women--we know it
from history--who have been born into the world for each other, and for
no one else, who have accomplished the longest journey locked in each
other’s arms. But romantic love is also the code of modern morals, and,
for this reason, popular. Eternal union, eternal ownership--these are
tempting baits for the average man. He swallows them, will not confess
his mistake, and--perhaps to cover it--cries “dirty cynic” at such a man
as Stephen.

Rickie watched the black earth unite to the black sky. But the sky
overhead grew clearer, and in it twinkled the Plough and the central
stars. He thought of his brother’s future and of his own past, and of
how much truth might lie in that antithesis of Ansell’s: “A man wants to
love mankind, a woman wants to love one man.” At all events, he and his
wife had illustrated it, and perhaps the conflict, so tragic in their
own case, was elsewhere the salt of the world. Meanwhile Stephen called
from the water for matches: there was some trick with paper which Mr.
Failing had showed him, and which he would show Rickie now, instead of
talking nonsense. Bending down, he illuminated the dimpled surface of
the ford. “Quite a current.” he said, and his face flickered out in the
darkness. “Yes, give me the loose paper, quick! Crumple it into a ball.”

Rickie obeyed, though intent on the transfigured face. He believed
that a new spirit dwelt there, expelling the crudities of youth. He
saw steadier eyes, and the sign of manhood set like a bar of gold upon
steadier lips. Some faces are knit by beauty, or by intellect, or by a
great passion: had Stephen’s waited for the touch of the years?

But they played as boys who continued the nonsense of the railway
carriage. The paper caught fire from the match, and spread into a
rose of flame. “Now gently with me,” said Stephen, and they laid it
flowerlike on the stream. Gravel and tremulous weeds leapt into sight,
and then the flower sailed into deep water, and up leapt the two arches
of a bridge. “It’ll strike!” they cried; “no, it won’t; it’s chosen the
left,” and one arch became a fairy tunnel, dropping diamonds. Then it
vanished for Rickie; but Stephen, who knelt in the water, declared that
it was still afloat, far through the arch, burning as if it would burn
forever.


XXXIV

The carriage that Mrs. Failing had sent to meet her nephew returned from
Cadchurch station empty. She was preparing for a solitary dinner when
he somehow arrived, full of apologies, but more sedate than she had
expected. She cut his explanations short. “Never mind how you got here.
You are here, and I am quite pleased to see you.” He changed his clothes
and they proceeded to the dining-room.

There was a bright fire, but the curtains were not drawn. Mr. Failing
had believed that windows with the night behind are more beautiful than
any pictures, and his widow had kept to the custom. It was brave of her
to persevere, lumps of chalk having come out of the night last June. For
some obscure reason--not so obscure to Rickie--she had preserved them
as mementoes of an episode. Seeing them in a row on the mantelpiece,
he expected that their first topic would be Stephen. But they never
mentioned him, though he was latent in all that they said.

It was of Mr. Failing that they spoke. The Essays had been a success.
She was really pleased. The book was brought in at her request, and
between the courses she read it aloud to her nephew, in her soft yet
unsympathetic voice. Then she sent for the press notices--after all
no one despises them--and read their comments on her introduction. She
wielded a graceful pen, was apt, adequate, suggestive, indispensable,
unnecessary. So the meal passed pleasantly away, for no one could so
well combine the formal with the unconventional, and it only seemed
charming when papers littered her stately table.

“My man wrote very nicely,” she observed. “Now, you read me something
out of him that you like. Read ‘The True Patriot.’”

He took the book and found: “Let us love one another. Let our children,
physical and spiritual, love one another. It is all that we can do.
Perhaps the earth will neglect our love. Perhaps she will confirm it,
and suffer some rallying-point, spire, mound, for the new generations to
cherish.”

“He wrote that when he was young. Later on he doubted whether we had
better love one another, or whether the earth will confirm anything. He
died a most unhappy man.”

He could not help saying, “Not knowing that the earth had confirmed
him.”

“Has she? It is quite possible. We meet so seldom in these days, she and
I. Do you see much of the earth?”

“A little.”

“Do you expect that she will confirm you?”

“It is quite possible.”

“Beware of her, Rickie, I think.”

“I think not.”

“Beware of her, surely. Going back to her really is going back--throwing
away the artificiality which (though you young people won’t confess it)
is the only good thing in life. Don’t pretend you are simple. Once I
pretended. Don’t pretend that you care for anything but for clever talk
such as this, and for books.”

“The talk,” said Leighton afterwards, “certainly was clever. But it
meant something, all the same.” He heard no more, for his mistress told
him to retire.

“And my nephew, this being so, make up your quarrel with your wife.” She
stretched out her hand to him with real feeling. “It is easier now than
it will be later. Poor lady, she has written to me foolishly and often,
but, on the whole, I side with her against you. She would grant you all
that you fought for--all the people, all the theories. I have it, in her
writing, that she will never interfere with your life again.”

“She cannot help interfering,” said Rickie, with his eyes on the black
windows. “She despises me. Besides, I do not love her.”

“I know, my dear. Nor she you. I am not being sentimental. I say
once more, beware of the earth. We are conventional people, and
conventions--if you will but see it--are majestic in their way, and
will claim us in the end. We do not live for great passions or for great
memories, or for anything great.”

He threw up his head. “We do.”

“Now listen to me. I am serious and friendly tonight, as you must have
observed. I have asked you here partly to amuse myself--you belong to
my March Past--but also to give you good advice. There has been a
volcano--a phenomenon which I too once greatly admired. The eruption is
over. Let the conventions do their work now, and clear the rubbish away.
My age is fifty-nine, and I tell you solemnly that the important things
in life are little things, and that people are not important at all. Go
back to your wife.”

He looked at her, and was filled with pity. He knew that he would never
be frightened of her again. Only because she was serious and friendly
did he trouble himself to reply. “There is one little fact I should
like to tell you, as confuting your theory. The idea of a story--a long
story--had been in my head for a year. As a dream to amuse myself--the
kind of amusement you would recommend for the future. I should have had
time to write it, but the people round me coloured my life, and so it
never seemed worth while. For the story is not likely to pay. Then came
the volcano. A few days after it was over I lay in bed looking out upon
a world of rubbish. Two men I know--one intellectual, the other very
much the reverse--burst into the room. They said, ‘What happened to
your short stories? They weren’t good, but where are they? Why have you
stopped writing? Why haven’t you been to Italy? You must write. You
must go. Because to write, to go, is you.’ Well, I have written, and
yesterday we sent the long story out on its rounds. The men do not like
it, for different reasons. But it mattered very much to them that I
should write it, and so it got written. As I told you, this is only one
fact; other facts, I trust, have happened in the last five months. But
I mention it to prove that people are important, and therefore, however
much it inconveniences my wife, I will not go back to her.”

“And Italy?” asked Mrs. Failing.

This question he avoided. Italy must wait. Now that he had the time, he
had not the money.

“Or what is the long story about, then?”

“About a man and a woman who meet and are happy.”

“Somewhat of a tour de force, I conclude.”

He frowned. “In literature we needn’t intrude our own limitations.
I’m not so silly as to think that all marriages turn out like mine. My
character is to blame for our catastrophe, not marriage.”

“My dear, I too have married; marriage is to blame.”

But here again he seemed to know better.

“Well,” she said, leaving the table and moving with her dessert to the
mantelpiece, “so you are abandoning marriage and taking to literature.
And are happy.”

“Yes.”

“Because, as we used to say at Cambridge, the cow is there. The world is
real again. This is a room, that a window, outside is the night.”

“Go on.”

He pointed to the floor. “The day is straight below, shining through
other windows into other rooms.”

“You are very odd,” she said after a pause, “and I do not like you at
all. There you sit, eating my biscuits, and all the time you know that
the earth is round. Who taught you? I am going to bed now, and all the
night, you tell me, you and I and the biscuits go plunging eastwards,
until we reach the sun. But breakfast will be at nine as usual.
Good-night.”

She rang the bell twice, and her maid came with her candle and her
walking-stick: it was her habit of late to go to her room as soon as
dinner was over, for she had no one to sit up with. Rickie was impressed
by her loneliness, and also by the mixture in her of insight and
obtuseness. She was so quick, so clear-headed, so imaginative even.
But all the same, she had forgotten what people were like. Finding life
dull, she had dropped lies into it, as a chemist drops a new element
into a solution, hoping that life would thereby sparkle or turn some
beautiful colour. She loved to mislead others, and in the end her
private view of false and true was obscured, and she misled herself. How
she must have enjoyed their errors over Stephen! But her own error had
been greater, inasmuch as it was spiritual entirely.

Leighton came in with some coffee. Feeling it unnecessary to light the
drawing-room lamp for one small young man, he persuaded Rickie to say he
preferred the dining-room. So Rickie sat down by the fire playing with
one of the lumps of chalk. His thoughts went back to the ford, from
which they had scarcely wandered. Still he heard the horse in the
dark drinking, still he saw the mystic rose, and the tunnel dropping
diamonds. He had driven away alone, believing the earth had confirmed
him. He stood behind things at last, and knew that conventions are not
majestic, and that they will not claim us in the end.

As he mused, the chalk slipped from his fingers, and fell on the
coffee-cup, which broke. The china, said Leighton, was expensive. He
believed it was impossible to match it now. Each cup was different. It
was a harlequin set. The saucer, without the cup, was therefore useless.
Would Mr. Elliot please explain to Mrs. Failing how it happened.

Rickie promised he would explain.

He had left Stephen preparing to bathe, and had heard him working
up-stream like an animal, splashing in the shallows, breathing heavily
as he swam the pools; at times reeds snapped, or clods of earth were
pulled in. By the fire he remembered it was again November. “Should you
like a walk?” he asked Leighton, and told him who stopped in the village
tonight. Leighton was pleased. At nine o’clock the two young men left
the house, under a sky that was still only bright in the zenith. “It
will rain tomorrow,” Leighton said.

“My brother says, fine tomorrow.”

“Fine tomorrow,” Leighton echoed.

“Now which do you mean?” asked Rickie, laughing.

Since the plumes of the fir-trees touched over the drive, only a very
little light penetrated. It was clearer outside the lodge gate, and
bubbles of air, which Wiltshire seemed to have travelled from an immense
distance, broke gently and separately on his face. They paused on the
bridge. He asked whether the little fish and the bright green weeds were
here now as well as in the summer. The footman had not noticed. Over the
bridge they came to the cross-roads, of which one led to Salisbury and
the other up through the string of villages to the railway station.
The road in front was only the Roman road, the one that went on to the
downs. Turning to the left, they were in Cadford.

“He will be with the Thompsons,” said Rickie, looking up at dark eaves.
“Perhaps he’s in bed already.”

“Perhaps he will be at The Antelope.”

“No. Tonight he is with the Thompsons.”

“With the Thompsons.” After a dozen paces he said, “The Thompsons have
gone away.”

“Where? Why?”

“They were turned out by Mr. Wilbraham on account of our broken
windows.”

“Are you sure?”

“Five families were turned out.”

“That’s bad for Stephen,” said Rickie, after a pause. “He was looking
forward--oh, it’s monstrous in any case!”

“But the Thompsons have gone to London,” said Leighton. “Why, that
family--they say it’s been in the valley hundreds of years, and never
got beyond shepherding. To various parts of London.”

“Let us try The Antelope, then.”

“Let us try The Antelope.”

The inn lay up in the village. Rickie hastened his pace. This tyranny
was monstrous. Some men of the age of undergraduates had broken windows,
and therefore they and their families were to be ruined. The fools who
govern us find it easier to be severe. It saves them trouble to say,
“The innocent must suffer with the guilty.” It even gives them a thrill
of pride. Against all this wicked nonsense, against the Wilbrahams and
Pembrokes who try to rule our world Stephen would fight till he died.
Stephen was a hero. He was a law to himself, and rightly. He was great
enough to despise our small moralities. He was attaining love. This
evening Rickie caught Ansell’s enthusiasm, and felt it worth while to
sacrifice everything for such a man.

“The Antelope,” said Leighton. “Those lights under the greatest elm.”

“Would you please ask if he’s there, and if he’d come for a turn with
me. I don’t think I’ll go in.”

Leighton opened the door. They saw a little room, blue with
tobacco-smoke. Flanking the fire were deep settles hiding all but the
legs of the men who lounged in them. Between the settles stood a table,
covered with mugs and glasses. The scene was picturesque--fairer than
the cutglass palaces of the town.

“Oh yes, he’s there,” he called, and after a moment’s hesitation came
out.

“Would he come?”

“No. I shouldn’t say so,” replied Leighton, with a furtive glance. He
knew that Rickie was a milksop. “First night, you know, sir, among old
friends.”

“Yes, I know,” said Rickie. “But he might like a turn down the village.
It looks stuffy inside there, and poor fun probably to watch others
drinking.”

Leighton shut the door.

“What was that he called after you?”

“Oh, nothing. A man when he’s drunk--he says the worst he’s ever heard.
At least, so they say.”

“A man when he’s drunk?”

“Yes, Sir.”

“But Stephen isn’t drinking?”

“No, no.”

“He couldn’t be. If he broke a promise--I don’t pretend he’s a saint. I
don’t want him one. But it isn’t in him to break a promise.”

“Yes, sir; I understand.”

“In the train he promised me not to drink--nothing theatrical: just a
promise for these few days.”

“No, sir.” “‘No, sir,’” stamped Rickie. “‘Yes! no! yes!’ Can’t you speak
out? Is he drunk or isn’t he?”

Leighton, justly exasperated, cried, “He can’t stand, and I’ve told you
so again and again.”

“Stephen!” shouted Rickie, darting up the steps. Heat and the smell of
beer awaited him, and he spoke more furiously than he had intended. “Is
there any one here who’s sober?” he cried. The landlord looked over
the bar angrily, and asked him what he meant. He pointed to the deep
settles. “Inside there he’s drunk. Tell him he’s broken his word, and I
will not go with him to the Rings.”

“Very well. You won’t go with him to the Rings,” said the landlord,
stepping forward and slamming the door in his face.

In the room he was only angry, but out in the cool air he remembered
that Stephen was a law to himself. He had chosen to break his word, and
would break it again. Nothing else bound him. To yield to temptation is
not fatal for most of us. But it was the end of everything for a hero.

“He’s suddenly ruined!” he cried, not yet remembering himself. For a
little he stood by the elm-tree, clutching the ridges of its bark. Even
so would he wrestle tomorrow, and Stephen, imperturbable, reply, “My
body is my own.” Or worse still, he might wrestle with a pliant Stephen
who promised him glibly again. While he prayed for a miracle to convert
his brother, it struck him that he must pray for himself. For he, too,
was ruined.

“Why, what’s the matter?” asked Leighton. “Stephen’s only being with
friends. Mr. Elliot, sir, don’t break down. Nothing’s happened bad. No
one’s died yet, or even hurt themselves.” Ever kind, he took hold of
Rickie’s arm, and, pitying such a nervous fellow, set out with him for
home. The shoulders of Orion rose behind them over the topmost boughs of
the elm. From the bridge the whole constellation was visible, and Rickie
said, “May God receive me and pardon me for trusting the earth.”

“But, Mr. Elliot, what have you done that’s wrong?”

“Gone bankrupt, Leighton, for the second time. Pretended again that
people were real. May God have mercy on me!”

Leighton dropped his arm. Though he did not understand, a chill of
disgust passed over him, and he said, “I will go back to The Antelope. I
will help them put Stephen to bed.”

“Do. I will wait for you here.” Then he leant against the parapet and
prayed passionately, for he knew that the conventions would claim him
soon. God was beyond them, but ah, how far beyond, and to be reached
after what degradation! At the end of this childish detour his wife
awaited him, not less surely because she was only his wife in name. He
was too weak. Books and friends were not enough. Little by little she
would claim him and corrupt him and make him what he had been; and the
woman he loved would die out, in drunkenness, in debauchery, and her
strength would be dissipated by a man, her beauty defiled in a man. She
would not continue. That mystic rose and the face it illumined meant
nothing. The stream--he was above it now--meant nothing, though it
burst from the pure turf and ran for ever to the sea. The bather, the
shoulders of Orion-they all meant nothing, and were going nowhere. The
whole affair was a ridiculous dream.

Leighton returned, saying, “Haven’t you seen Stephen? They say he
followed us: he can still walk: I told you he wasn’t so bad.”

“I don’t think he passed me. Ought one to look?” He wandered a little
along the Roman road. Again nothing mattered. At the level-crossing he
leant on the gate to watch a slow goods train pass. In the glare of the
engine he saw that his brother had come this way, perhaps through some
sodden memory of the Rings, and now lay drunk over the rails. Wearily
he did a man’s duty. There was time to raise him up and push him into
safety. It is also a man’s duty to save his own life, and therefore he
tried. The train went over his knees. He died up in Cadover, whispering,
“You have been right,” to Mrs. Failing.

She wrote of him to Mrs. Lewin afterwards as “one who has failed in
all he undertook; one of the thousands whose dust returns to the dust,
accomplishing nothing in the interval. Agnes and I buried him to the
sound of our cracked bell, and pretended that he had once been alive.
The other, who was always honest, kept away.”



XXXV

From the window they looked over a sober valley, whose sides were
not too sloping to be ploughed, and whose trend was followed by a
grass-grown track. It was late on Sunday afternoon, and the valley was
deserted except for one labourer, who was coasting slowly downward on
a rosy bicycle. The air was very quiet. A jay screamed up in the woods
behind, but the ring-doves, who roost early, were already silent.
Since the window opened westward, the room was flooded with light, and
Stephen, finding it hot, was working in his shirtsleeves.

“You guarantee they’ll sell?” he asked, with a pen between his teeth. He
was tidying up a pile of manuscripts.

“I guarantee that the world will be the gainer,” said Mr. Pembroke,
now a clergyman, who sat beside him at the table with an expression of
refined disapproval on his face.

“I’d got the idea that the long story had its points, but that these
shorter things didn’t--what’s the word?”

“‘Convince’ is probably the word you want. But that type of criticism
is quite a thing of the past. Have you seen the illustrated American
edition?”

“I don’t remember.”

“Might I send you a copy? I think you ought to possess one.”

“Thank you.” His eye wandered. The bicycle had disappeared into
some trees, and thither, through a cloudless sky, the sun was also
descending.

“Is all quite plain?” said Mr. Pembroke. “Submit these ten stories to
the magazines, and make your own terms with the editors. Then--I have
your word for it--you will join forces with me; and the four stories in
my possession, together with yours, should make up a volume, which we
might well call ‘Pan Pipes.’”

“Are you sure `Pan Pipes’ haven’t been used up already?”

Mr. Pembroke clenched his teeth. He had been bearing with this sort of
thing for nearly an hour. “If that is the case, we can select another.
A title is easy to come by. But that is the idea it must suggest. The
stories, as I have twice explained to you, all centre round a Nature
theme. Pan, being the god of--”

“I know that,” said Stephen impatiently.

“--Being the god of--”

“All right. Let’s get furrard. I’ve learnt that.”

It was years since the schoolmaster had been interrupted, and he could
not stand it. “Very well,” he said. “I bow to your superior knowledge of
the classics. Let us proceed.”

“Oh yes the introduction. There must be one. It was the introduction
with all those wrong details that sold the other book.”

“You overwhelm me. I never penned the memoir with that intention.”

“If you won’t do one, Mrs. Keynes must!”

“My sister leads a busy life. I could not ask her. I will do it myself
since you insist.”

“And the binding?”

“The binding,” said Mr. Pembroke coldly, “must really be left to the
discretion of the publisher. We cannot be concerned with such details.
Our task is purely literary.” His attention wandered. He began to
fidget, and finally bent down and looked under the table. “What have we
here?” he asked.

Stephen looked also, and for a moment they smiled at each other over
the prostrate figure of a child, who was cuddling Mr. Pembroke’s boots.
“She’s after the blacking,” he explained. “If we left her there, she’d
lick them brown.”

“Indeed. Is that so very safe?”

“It never did me any harm. Come up! Your tongue’s dirty.”

“Can I--” She was understood to ask whether she could clean her tongue
on a lollie.

“No, no!” said Mr. Pembroke. “Lollipops don’t clean little girls’
tongues.”

“Yes, they do,” he retorted. “But she won’t get one.” He lifted her on
his knee, and rasped her tongue with his handkerchief.

“Dear little thing,” said the visitor perfunctorily. The child began
to squall, and kicked her father in the stomach. Stephen regarded her
quietly. “You tried to hurt me,” he said. “Hurting doesn’t count. Trying
to hurt counts. Go and clean your tongue yourself. Get off my knee.”
 Tears of another sort came into her eyes, but she obeyed him. “How’s the
great Bertie?” he asked.

“Thank you. My nephew is perfectly well. How came you to hear of his
existence?”

“Through the Silts, of course. It isn’t five miles to Cadover.”

Mr. Pembroke raised his eyes mournfully. “I cannot conceive how the poor
Silts go on in that great house. Whatever she intended, it could not
have been that. The house, the farm, the money,--everything down to the
personal articles that belong to Mr. Failing, and should have reverted
to his family!”

“It’s legal. Interstate succession.”

“I do not dispute it. But it is a lesson to one to make a will. Mrs.
Keynes and myself were electrified.”

“They’ll do there. They offered me the agency, but--” He looked down
the cultivated slopes. His manners were growing rough, for he saw few
gentlemen now, and he was either incoherent or else alarmingly direct.
“However, if Lawrie Silt’s a Cockney like his father, and if my next is
a boy and like me--” A shy beautiful look came into his eyes, and passed
unnoticed. “They’ll do,” he repeated. “They turned out Wilbraham and
built new cottages, and bridged the railway, and made other necessary
alterations.” There was a moment’s silence.

Mr. Pembroke took out his watch. “I wonder if I might have the trap? I
mustn’t miss my train, must I? It is good of you to have granted me an
interview. It is all quite plain?”

“Yes.”

“A case of half and half-division of profits.”

“Half and half?” said the young farmer slowly. “What do you take me for?
Half and half, when I provide ten of the stories and you only four?”

“I--I--” stammered Mr. Pembroke.

“I consider you did me over the long story, and I’m damned if you do me
over the short ones!”

“Hush! if you please, hush!--if only for your little girl’s sake.”

He lifted a clerical palm.

“You did me,” his voice drove, “and all the thirty-nine Articles won’t
stop me saying so. That long story was meant to be mine. I got it
written. You’ve done me out of every penny it fetched. It’s dedicated to
me--flat out--and you even crossed out the dedication and tidied me out
of the introduction. Listen to me, Pembroke. You’ve done people all your
life--I think without knowing it, but that won’t comfort us. A wretched
devil at your school once wrote to me, and he’d been done. Sham food,
sham religion, sham straight talks--and when he broke down, you said it
was the world in miniature.” He snatched at him roughly. “But I’ll show
you the world.” He twisted him round like a baby, and through the open
door they saw only the quiet valley, but in it a rivulet that would
in time bring its waters to the sea. “Look even at that--and up behind
where the Plain begins and you get on the solid chalk--think of us
riding some night when you’re ordering your hot bottle--that’s the
world, and there’s no miniature world. There’s one world, Pembroke, and
you can’t tidy men out of it. They answer you back do you hear?--they
answer back if you do them. If you tell a man this way that four sheep
equal ten, he answers back you’re a liar.”

Mr. Pembroke was speechless, and--such is human nature--he chiefly
resented the allusion to the hot bottle; an unmanly luxury in which he
never indulged; contenting himself with nightsocks. “Enough--there is no
witness present--as you have doubtless observed.” But there was. For a
little voice cried, “Oh, mummy, they’re fighting--such fun--” and feet
went pattering up the stairs. “Enough. You talk of ‘doing,’ but what
about the money out of which you ‘did’ my sister? What about this
picture”--he pointed to a faded photograph of Stockholm--“which you
caused to be filched from the walls of my house? What about--enough!
Let us conclude this disheartening scene. You object to my terms. Name
yours. I shall accept them. It is futile to reason with one who is the
worse for drink.”

Stephen was quiet at once. “Steady on!” he said gently. “Steady on
in that direction. Take one-third for your four stories and the
introduction, and I will keep two-thirds for myself.” Then he went to
harness the horse, while Mr. Pembroke, watching his broad back,
desired to bury a knife in it. The desire passed, partly because it was
unclerical, partly because he had no knife, and partly because he soon
blurred over what had happened. To him all criticism was “rudeness”:
he never heeded it, for he never needed it: he was never wrong. All his
life he had ordered little human beings about, and now he was equally
magisterial to big ones: Stephen was a fifth-form lout whom, owing to
some flaw in the regulations, he could not send up to the headmaster to
be caned.

This attitude makes for tranquillity. Before long he felt merely an
injured martyr. His brain cleared. He stood deep in thought before the
only other picture that the bare room boasted--the Demeter of Cnidus.
Outside the sun was sinking, and its last rays fell upon the immortal
features and the shattered knees. Sweet-peas offered their fragrance,
and with it there entered those more mysterious scents that come from
no one flower or clod of earth, but from the whole bosom of evening.
He tried not to be cynical. But in his heart he could not regret that
tragedy, already half-forgotten, conventionalized, indistinct. Of course
death is a terrible thing. Yet death is merciful when it weeds out a
failure. If we look deep enough, it is all for the best. He stared at
the picture and nodded.

Stephen, who had met his visitor at the station, had intended to drive
him back there. But after their spurt of temper he sent him with the
boy. He remained in the doorway, glad that he was going to make money,
glad that he had been angry; while the glow of the clear sky deepened,
and the silence was perfected, and the scents of the night grew
stronger. Old vagrancies awoke, and he resolved that, dearly as he
loved his house, he would not enter it again till dawn. “Goodnight!” he
called, and then the child came running, and he whispered, “Quick, then!
Bring me a rug.” “Good-night,” he repeated, and a pleasant voice called
through an upper window, “Why good-night?” He did not answer until the
child was wrapped up in his arms.

“It is time that she learnt to sleep out,” he cried. “If you want me,
we’re out on the hillside, where I used to be.”

The voice protested, saying this and that.

“Stewart’s in the house,” said the man, “and it cannot matter, and I am
going anyway.”

“Stephen, I wish you wouldn’t. I wish you wouldn’t take her. Promise
you won’t say foolish things to her. Don’t--I wish you’d come up for a
minute--”

The child, whose face was laid against his, felt the muscles in it
harden.

“Don’t tell her foolish things about yourself--things that aren’t any
longer true. Don’t worry her with old dead dreadfulness. To please
me--don’t.”

“Just tonight I won’t, then.”

“Stevie, dear, please me more--don’t take her with you.”

At this he laughed impertinently. “I suppose I’m being kept in line,”
 she called, and, though he could not see her, she stretched her arms
towards him. For a time he stood motionless, under her window, musing on
his happy tangible life. Then his breath quickened, and he wondered why
he was here, and why he should hold a warm child in his arms. “It’s time
we were starting,” he whispered, and showed the sky, whose orange was
already fading into green. “Wish everything goodnight.”

“Good-night, dear mummy,” she said sleepily. “Goodnight, dear house.
Good-night, you pictures--long picture--stone lady. I see you through
the window--your faces are pink.”

The twilight descended. He rested his lips on her hair, and carried her,
without speaking, until he reached the open down. He had often slept
here himself, alone, and on his wedding-night, and he knew that the turf
was dry, and that if you laid your face to it you would smell the
thyme. For a moment the earth aroused her, and she began to chatter. “My
prayers--” she said anxiously. He gave her one hand, and she was
asleep before her fingers had nestled in its palm. Their touch made him
pensive, and again he marvelled why he, the accident, was here. He was
alive and had created life. By whose authority? Though he could not
phrase it, he believed that he guided the future of our race, and that,
century after century, his thoughts and his passions would triumph in
England. The dead who had evoked him, the unborn whom he would evoke he
governed the paths between them. By whose authority?

Out in the west lay Cadover and the fields of his earlier youth, and
over them descended the crescent moon. His eyes followed her decline,
and against her final radiance he saw, or thought he saw, the outline
of the Rings. He had always been grateful, as people who understood him
knew. But this evening his gratitude seemed a gift of small account. The
ear was deaf, and what thanks of his could reach it? The body was dust,
and in what ecstasy of his could it share? The spirit had fled, in agony
and loneliness, never to know that it bequeathed him salvation.

He filled his pipe, and then sat pressing the unlit tobacco with his
thumb. “What am I to do?” he thought. “Can he notice the things he gave
me? A parson would know. But what’s a man like me to do, who works all
his life out of doors?” As he wondered, the silence of the night was
broken. The whistle of Mr. Pembroke’s train came faintly, and a lurid
spot passed over the land--passed, and the silence returned. One thing
remained that a man of his sort might do. He bent down reverently and
saluted the child; to whom he had given the name of their mother.







        
         
